METHODS IN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY™

Series Editor
John M. Walker
School of Life Sciences
University of Hertfordshire
Hatfield, Hertfordshire, AL10 9AB, UK

For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/7651

Psychoneuroimmunology
Methods and Protocols
Edited by

Qing Yan
PharmTao, Santa Clara, CA, USA

Editor
Qing Yan
PharmTao
Santa Clara, CA, USA

ISSN 1064-3745
ISSN 1940-6029 (electronic)
ISBN 978-1-62703-070-0
ISBN 978-1-62703-071-7 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7
Springer New York Heidelberg Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012944178
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction
on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation,
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this
legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied specifically for
the purpose of being entered and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work.
Duplication of this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions
for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to prosecution
under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not
imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and
regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication, neither
the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be
made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Humana Press is a brand of Springer
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) has developed rapidly in the last four decades. As a multidisciplinary area, PNI may provide a scientific basis for mind–body relationships toward the
development of personalized and systems medicine. Although it is still an emerging field, it
already has profound influences across all of the biomedical community. The biopsychosocial model is becoming the central theme for understanding health and diseases. Such
understanding would contribute to more accurate diagnosis and better therapeutics in personalized medicine.
This book has several features that readers may find helpful to their work. First of all, it
focuses on translational medicine by applying PNI approaches in clinical practice. One of
the major challenges in current bioscience is the translation of basic scientific discoveries
into better clinical outcomes. This book is written in response to this challenge by highlighting the clinical implications of PNI.
We hope that these approaches may help trigger some breakthroughs and advancement
toward the realization of personalized and mind–body medicine, which is also the second
feature of the book. That is, many of the methods and protocols described in the book are
geared toward the development of integrative and individualized therapeutics in multiple
dimensions from drugs to behaviors.
The third feature is that this book provides both practical methods and comprehensive
resources that can be used for solving complicated problems of complex systems. A wide
range of theoretical and experimental approaches are introduced with problem-solving
objectives, from laboratory tests to computational analysis.
The fourth feature is that this book integrates the advancement of science with innovative technologies. While the first part of the book describes basic concepts and important
topics in PNI, the second and third parts illustrate how the concepts and technologies can
be applied for disease understanding and improving clinical interventions.
Part I of the book introduces basic and novel concepts in PNI, especially the relationship between stress and immunity, one of the most important topics in PNI. In this part,
the association between stress and immunity is discussed in details from different aspects
and various levels, including how immune cells respond to stress, the roles of neuroendocrine receptors, as well as the influences of job stress and life experiences. Some mechanisms
of potential interventions are also described, such as the effects of physical activity.
This part explains how PNI may provide the scientific basis for the practice of mind–
body medicine as well as personalized and systems medicine (see Chap. 1). Some relevant
topics and concepts are discussed, such as biopsychosocial models, translational medicine,
and systems biology. The close relationships among stress, depression, and inflammation
are explored, as well as the clinical implications in diseases including obesity, cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, arthritis, skin diseases, infectious diseases, and sleep disorders. Integrative
interventions in multiple dimensions for modulating stress responses and promoting healthier behaviors are also proposed, such as drug therapies, diets, nutritional supplements, meditation, and other behavioral and mind–body strategies.

v

vi

Preface

Evidences have shown that life experience has fundamental biological relevance with
impacts on all adaptive systems such as the endocrine, immune, and nerve systems, with
profound meanings on health and diseases (see Chap. 2). Even though experience is often
ignored in the research of PNI, it deserves more attention for understanding the dynamic
interplay between mind, body, behavior, and environment. Such exploration may allow
meaningful and relevant interpretation and predictions in PNI.
Specifically, meta-analyses of the association between psychosocial job stress and
immune parameters in blood, saliva, and urine have found that stresses such as high job
demands, low job control, and economic recession are related to disrupted immune
responses (see Chap. 3). At the molecular and cellular levels, studies of the neuroendocrine
receptor activity by immune cells and neuroimmune responses may provide insights into
the pathophysiological mechanisms of health and disease (see Chap. 4).
Integrative and multidimensional interventions have been found helpful for relieving
stress and relevant diseases. For example, regular exercise may be associated with stress
reduction and better mood (see Chap. 5). Epidemiological evidences have shown the relationships between physical activity and mental health. The inflammatory response has been
considered a central mechanism underlying such correlations.
Part II of this book focuses on the clinical implications of these concepts and methods
in the translation of PNI into the understanding of various disease states and development
of personalized therapeutics. Because biomarkers play critical roles in the practice of personalized medicine, translational implications of potential biomarkers in various disorders
are discussed in details in this part.
Among the potential PNI biomarkers, inflammatory markers deserve special attention
as they play a pivotal role linking various health conditions and disorders including depression, obesity, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, Alzheimer’s disease, and HIV (see Chap. 6).
Applications of systems biology approaches would enable the insights into the correlations
among various systems for the identification of the basic elements of the psychophysiological framework. The understanding of the cytokine networks, immune–brain–behavior
interactions, and systemic pathways among different disorders may contribute to the transition from the disease-centered medicine to patient-centered medicine.
Specifically, cytokines are the central players in the neuroinflammatory cascades related
to the neurodegenerative process in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and other neurological disorders (see Chap. 7). With great promise as serological biomarkers in PD, cytokines have
potential applications in diagnosis, prognosis, drug discovery, and analysis of treatment
responses. On the basis of cytokine panel profiles, subclassification or risk stratification in
PD can be defined, which is meaningful for the development of personalized interventions.
The major cytokine multiplex assay platforms can be useful tools for biomarker discovery in
PD and its cognitive comorbidities (see Chap. 7). In another example, complex disorders
like Gulf War illness (GWI) can be distinguishable by measuring the co-expression of multiple markers, such as using a three-way multivariate projection model with 12 markers of
endocrine and immune functions (see Chap. 8).
Depressed heart failure (HF) patients often have worse clinical outcomes than the nondepressed counterparts. PNI principals can be applied to elucidate the mechanisms such as
cytokine activation connecting the comorbid disorders (see Chap. 9). In cancers, recent
studies have found that the prognosis not only depends on the biological features of tumors,
but also on the immune status of cancer patients that is under a psychoneuroendocrine

Preface

vii

control. The therapeutic approach based on PNI for the treatment of cancer should try to
reestablish the neuroimmune conditions (see Chap. 10).
In addition, the impact of immune activation on the central nervous system (CNS) is
especially important for aged individuals. Effective treatments must reduce inflammatory
activity and preserving microglia’s neuroprotective function at the same time. Discovering
factors of neuroinflammation may contribute to potential preventative therapies for maintaining normal microglia activity in the aged brain (see Chap. 11).
Furthermore, immune functions have been associated with autism spectrum disorders
(ASD), e.g., some genes related to immune regulation are changed in ASD. Many systemic
and cellular immune abnormalities have been found in individuals with ASD and their families, such as changes in cytokine and chemokine production with increasing impairment in
behaviors. Understanding of the interactions between the nervous and immune system during early neurodevelopment may have important therapeutic implications (see Chap. 12).
Part III of this book introduces various cutting-edge technologies models for PNI
studies, from experimental approaches to data analysis and decision support. These technologies include the utilizations of mouse models, the chromium release whole blood assay,
imaging techniques, vaccine models, as well as translational bioinformatics.
Specifically, mouse models have extensive applications in PNI studies. Immunobehavioral
phenotyping is a first-line approach for exploring the neuroimmune system and its reactions. Behavioral tests are frequently used to examine neuroimmune activation in mice (see
Chap. 13). The murine MRL model with high validity in revealing principal pathogenic
circuits has been considered indispensable in understanding the brain-immune links (see
Chap. 14). In addition, mouse models have been useful for examining the effects of the
complex biology of cytokines such as IL-2 on multiple systems. Models such as congenic
IL-2 knockout mice can be applied to investigate neuroimmunological processes in neurological diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and schizophrenia, as well as autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis (see Chap. 15).
Natural killer (NK) cells are sensitive barometers of the effects of stressors on the
immune system. A chromium (51Cr) release whole blood bioassay can be used to measure
the target cell killing capacity of NK cells (see Chap. 16). Positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging is a tool for measuring brain metabolism and target molecules. By detecting
brain variables, PET imaging can be combined with other experimental and clinical model
systems for PNI research (see Chap. 17).
In addition, vaccination models are very useful for the examination of the effects of
psychosocial factors on immunity (see Chap. 18). Such protocols can help elucidate the
association between stress and the vaccination response. These models can be applied for
promoting vaccine responses in at risk populations by assisting decisions on the choice of
vaccination, timing of assessments, and the available outcome measures (see Chap. 19).
Furthermore, translational bioinformatics provides a powerful method to bridge the
gaps between various knowledge domains in PNI and systems biology (see Chap. 20).
Translational bioinformatics methods at various systems levels are introduced. These methods can facilitate pattern recognition and expedite the discovery of systemic biomarkers for
clinical trials and outcome assessments. Methods and applications of data integration, data
mining, and decision support in PNI are also discussed.
By covering topics from fundamental concepts to advanced technologies, this book can
be used by biomedical students and professionals at all levels who are interested in integrative

viii

Preface

studies in psychology, psychiatry, neuroscience, immunology, PNI, molecular biology,
genetics, bioinformatics, bioengineering, biochemistry, physiology, pathology, microbiology,
pharmacology, toxicology, systems biology, drug discovery, and clinical medicine. Written
by leading experts in the field, this book intends to provide a practical, state-of-the-art, and
holistic view for the translation of PNI into better preventive and personalized medical
practice.
I would like to thank all of the authors for sharing their profound thoughts and experiences, and for making valuable contributions to this exciting new field. I also thank the
series editor, Dr. John Walker, for his help with the editing.
Qing Yan
Santa Clara, CA, USA

Contents
Preface. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

PART I

STRESS AND IMMUNITY: BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL MODELS

1 The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized
and Systems Medicine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qing Yan
2 Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Elling Ulvestad
3 Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Akinori Nakata
4 Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying:
Neuroendocrine Receptors Orchestrate Immune Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Harlan P. Jones
5 Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood:
Insight into Immunological Mechanisms. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mark Hamer, Romano Endrighi, and Lydia Poole

PART II

v
xi

3
21
39

77

89

TRANSLATION OF PSYCHONEUROIMMUNOLOGY
INTO PERSONALIZED MEDICINE: POTENTIAL BIOMARKERS
AND CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS

6 Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers
and Cytokine Networks in Psychoneuroimmunology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qing Yan
7 Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease:
A Multiplex Approach. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Darcy Litteljohn and Shawn Hayley
8 Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker
Coexpression in Gulf War Illness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gordon Broderick, Mary Ann Fletcher, Michael Gallagher,
Zachary Barnes, Suzanne D. Vernon, and Nancy G. Klimas
9 Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jessica A. Jiménez and Paul J. Mills
10 A Reinterpretation of the Pathogenesis and Cure of Cancer
According to the Psychoneuroimmunological Discoveries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Paolo Lissoni

ix

105

121

145

165

183

x

Contents

11 Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rachel A. Kohman
12 Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Milo Careaga and Paul Ashwood

PART III

193
219

TECHNOLOGIES AND MODELS IN PSYCHONEUROIMMUNOLOGY STUDIES

13 Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology:
An Overview of How to Measure Sickness, Depressive/Anxietal,
Cognitive, and Physical Activity Behaviors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jason M. York, Neil A. Blevins, Tracy Baynard,
and Gregory G. Freund
14 The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies
of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Boris Sakić
15 Interleukin-2 and the Brain: Dissecting Central Versus
Peripheral Contributions Using Unique Mouse Models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
John M. Petitto, Danielle Meola, and Zhi Huang
16 Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells:
The Chromium Release Whole Blood Assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mary Ann Fletcher, Zachary Barnes, Gordon Broderick,
and Nancy G. Klimas
17 The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research . . . . .
Jonas Hannestad
18 The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research:
A Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Anna C. Phillips
19 Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune Function
in Psychoneuroimmunology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Victoria E. Burns
20 Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology:
Methods and Applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qing Yan
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

243

277

301

313

325

355

371

383
401

Contributors
PAUL ASHWOOD • Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology
and the M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA, USA
ZACHARY BARNES • Department of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA
TRACY BAYNARD • Department of Kinesiology and Community Health,
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA
NEIL A. BLEVINS • Department of Pathology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA
GORDON BRODERICK • Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary Medicine,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
VICTORIA E. BURNS • School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
MILO CAREAGA • Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology
and the M.I.N.D. Institute, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA, USA
ROMANO ENDRIGHI • Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology
and Public Health, University College London, London, UK
MARY ANN FLETCHER • Department of Medicine, University of Miami,
Miami, FL, USA; Miami Veterans Affairs Medical Center Miami, FL, USA
GREGORY G. FREUND • Department of Pathology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
MICHAEL GALLAGHER • Department of Family Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB, Canada
MARK HAMER • Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, UK
JONAS HANNESTAD • Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT, USA
SHAWN HAYLEY • Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa,
ON, Canada
ZHI HUANG • Departments of Psychiatry, Neuroscience, and Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
JESSICA A. JIMÉNEZ • Department of Psychiatry, University of California at San Diego, San
Diego, CA, USA
HARLAN P. JONES • Department of Molecular Biology and Immunology,
University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX, USA
NANCY G. KLIMAS • Institute for Neuro-immune Medicine, Nova Southeastern
University, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, USA; Miami Veterans Affairs Medical Center
Miami, FL, USA
RACHEL A. KOHMAN • Department of Psychology, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, Beckman Institute, Urbana, IL, USA

xi

xii

Contributors

PAOLO LISSONI • Institute of Biological Medicine, Milan, Italy
DARCY LITTELJOHN • Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University,
Ottawa, ON, Canada
DANIELLE MEOLA • Departments of Psychiatry, Neuroscience, and Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
PAUL J. MILLS • Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego,
San Diego, CA, USA
AKINORI NAKATA • Division of Applied Research and Technology, National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Cincinnati, OH, USA
JOHN M. PETITTO • Departments of Psychiatry, Neuroscience, and Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA
ANNA C. PHILLIPS • School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, UK
LYDIA POOLE • Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health,
University College London, London, UK
BORIS SAKIĆ • Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences,
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
ELLING ULVESTAD • Department of Microbiology, The Gade Institute,
Haukeland University Hospital, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
SUZANNE D. VERNON • The CFIDS Association of America, Charlotte, NC, USA
QING YAN • PharmTao, Santa Clara, CA, USA; University of Phoenix,
Phoenix, AZ, USA
JASON M. YORK • Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL, USA

Part I
Stress and Immunity: Biopsychosocial Models

Chapter 1
The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized
and Systems Medicine
Qing Yan
Abstract
Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) may provide the scientific basis for personalized and systems medicine.
The exploration of the extensive interactions among psychological and behavioral factors, the nervous
system, the immune system, and the endocrine system may help understand the mechanisms underlying
health, wellness, and diseases. PNI theories based on systems biology methodologies may contribute to the
identification of patient patterns for establishing psychological and physiological profiles for personalized
medicine. A biopsychosocial model will help elucidate the systemic interrelationships between psychosocial
and bio-physiological factors for the development of systems medicine. Many evidences have supported
the close relationships between stress, depression, inflammation, and disorders including obesity, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, arthritis, skin diseases, infectious diseases, and sleep disorders. As inflammation
is a critical connection among different diseases, the elucidation of the associations may contribute to the
findings of systemic therapeutic targets. With the understanding of the translational implications of PNI,
integrative interventions in multiple dimensions can be applied to modulate stress responses and promote
healthier behaviors. These interventions include combination drug therapies, diets, nutritional supplements, meditation, and other behavioral and mind-body strategies.
Key words: Brain, Depression, Inflammation, Immune, Mind-body, Personalized medicine,
Psychoneuroimmunology, Stress, Systems biology, Translational medicine

1. Introduction
As an emerging field, psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) may provide
the scientific basis for personalized and systems medicine (1, 2).
During its fast development in the last 40 years, this multidisciplinary area already has influenced many fields profoundly all across
the biomedical research society, including psychology, neuroscience, endocrinology, immunology, pharmacology, and toxicology
(3). This rapidly developing field may have insightful meanings for
the practice of systems biology in personalized medicine. Systems
biology studies the interactions and interrelationships among
Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_1, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

3

4

Q. Yan

biomedical components at various systems levels and dimensions,
from molecules to cells, from the human society to the environment (4). The practice of systems biology may contribute to the
development of systems medicine. Specifically, PNI studies the
bidirectional interactions among psychological and behavioral
factors, the nervous system, the immune system, and the endocrine system (5–7). These systems are not isolated but are interactive and cooperative components of the integrated adaptive
processes (8). Historical, experimental, and clinical observations
have demonstrated that physical and psychological conditions have
close impacts on each other. For example, attitudes and social
supports can affect the likelihood of diseases and life expectancy
(9). Behavioral and life style interventions may improve therapeutic
outcomes. On the other hand, physical illness may lead to psychological alterations in mood, behavior, and memory (9).
The exploration of the extensive interactions between the
behavior and the physiological systems may help elucidate the
mechanisms underlying health, wellness, and diseases. For example, through hardwiring sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves
to lymphoid organs, the brain can regulate the immune system
directly (10). The balance of cytokines produced by the immune
system can be influenced by neuroendocrine hormones including
the corticotrophin-releasing hormone or substance P. On the other
hand, the immune system can affect the activities of the brain such
as sleep and body temperature (10). Such tight functional and anatomical connections enable highly reciprocal influences among
these systems. The intricate interactions enable the sense of danger
and the adaptive responses, and play critical roles in various
diseases. For instance, immune malfunction is one of the major
reasons of many age-related disorders, such as cardiovascular disease, cancers, type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis, arthritis, and functional
decline (11). Psychological states such as negative emotions can
affect these conditions via the promotion of proinflammatory
cytokine productions.
An important question that PNI tries to answer is the effects of
stress and negative emotions on the immune system. For example,
chronic stress has been found to contribute to anxiety and
depression (9). The underlying mechanisms of such effects include
alterations in the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis, the
sympathetic–adrenal–medullary axis, and the immune system (12).
At the molecular level, chronic stress and depression have been
associated with increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines,
glucocorticoids, catecholamines, as well as defects in the serotonergic functions (9, 12). Chronic stress may affect the corticotropin-releasing hormone system and disturb the signaling of the
glucocorticoid receptor (13). Glucocorticoid receptors on immune
cells may bind to cortisol to alter the function of nuclear factor-κB
(NF-κB) (12). Beyond the molecular level, alterations in the HPA

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

5

axis and the immune system may lead to neurodegenerative changes
in hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and amygdalae (9).
Changes at these different levels may have systemic consequences. The alterations in the release patterns of vasopressin,
dopamine, and serotonin may result in changes of emotionality,
cognitive functions, and social behaviors. The alterations in gene
expression mediated by glucocorticoid hormones and catecholamines may cause malfunctions of the immune system that
have various health implications (12). Such changes may result in
behavioral changes related to depression, and correlate chronic
stress and depression to the age-related disorders such as dementia
and Alzheimer’s disease (9, 14). Furthermore, distress can slow
down the wound healing process, increase susceptibility to infections, and reduce immune responses to vaccines. For example, in
women with cervical dysplasia, stress was found to be related to
lower HPV-specific immune responses (15). The HPV vaccine’s
efficacy may be impaired because stress may negatively influence
both the antibody and T-cell immunity. Such observations have
demonstrated that behavioral interventions will also be important
for improving the efficacies of vaccines.
To fully understand such complex interactions among multiple
levels from molecules to the brain tissues, from behavioral changes
to environmental effects, it is necessary to incorporate interdisciplinary methodologies such as those used in systems biology (1, 13).
Such approaches will enable the development of novel intervention
strategies for achieving the objectives of predictive, preventive, and
personalized medicine. As the key model for health and diseases, a
biopsychosocial paradigm will elucidate the systemic interactions
between psychosocial and biological factors for the development of
systems medicine (2, 4, 16, 17).
In fact, the development in PNI may contribute significantly
to reestablish the philosophical connection between holism and
reductionism in biomedical science. The currently increased interests
in the mind–body connections call for an integrative and holistic
framework in biomedicine for a more complete understanding of
the interactions among various systems. On the other hand, traditional in vitro approaches are often based on cultured cells that are
not influenced by interactions with other types of cells, hormones,
and neurotransmitters (9). These factors may contribute to the
inconsistent results between laboratory experiments and clinical
studies, as well as the barriers to the translation of basic scientific
studies into effective clinical therapeutics. Considering these factors,
studies in PNI based on systems biology approaches may help
rebuild the philosophical balance between holism and reductionism
by establishing integrative models of the systemic interactions.
Such approaches may help elucidate the correlations between
structures and functions at various systems levels, and correlate
genotypes with phenotypes, the key issues in personalized
medicine (2).

6

Q. Yan

The understanding of the multi-level interactions and the
biopsychosocial model will also be beneficial for the transformation from the disease-centered medicine to human-centered medicine (4). Malfunctions of the pathways and systemic changes such
as inflammation that commonly occur in multiple diseases rather
than one single disease state can be used as preventive and therapeutic targets. With the integration of factors from both the mind
and the body, more accurate diagnosis, lower risks of adverse
events, and better treatment outcomes can be achieved toward the
goals of personalized medicine (2).

2. Incorporating
Systemic
Psychoneuroimmunology Factors
for Personalized
Medicine: The
Biopsychosocial
Model

Systems
Levels

Based on the biopsychosocial model, personalized medicine should
incorporate both behavioral and physiological factors at various
systems levels for identifying patient patterns and profiles for the
differentiation of patient subgroups. For example, at the molecular
level, functional genetic variations need to be explored to study
individual responses (see Fig. 1). At the cellular level, cytokine
Personalized,
Multi-Dimensional
Interventions

Biopsychosocial
Factors

Human-environment interactions, stressors,
time factors
Environment
Societal factors (e.g., socioeconomic status)
Populations

Humans

Psychological and behavioral factors (e.g.,
personality, life styles, life experiences)

Organs

Tissues

Cells

Physiological systems factors (e.g.,
inflammation)

Cellular pathways (e.g., cytokine pathways)

Health
(emotional,
intellectual,
physical,
social,
spiritual,
environmental)
Diseases
(e.g., obesity,
cancer)

Behavioral
/Mind-Body
Strategies
(e.g.,
meditation,
exercises)

Diets/
Nutritional
Supplements

Longevity
Drugs

Molecules
Genomic markers (e.g., SNPs)

Fig. 1. A systems biology perspective of psychoneuroimmunology for the development of personalized medicine: biopsychosocial factors at various systems levels and potential personalized interventions in multiple dimensions.

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

7

networks and signaling pathways are important for systems
investigation. Factors and potential biomarkers at these levels will
be discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. At the psychological level,
differences in personalities and behaviors need to be considered
because individual variations in stress reactivity, coping styles, and
emotionality are associated with physiological responses including
immunity-related states (18). These psychological effects on the
immune system can affect disease states. Complex interactions
between the different levels in various time dimensions, such as
the gene–environment interactions during various periods in the
life span, should also be included.
Among all the factors, individual patterns of cognitive and
behavioral responses are especially important for understanding the
immune processes in different diseases. For instance, bereavement
is a stressful state that may induce alterations in the immune
responses including the activities of natural killer (NK) cells (19).
In such a state, factors such as personality may cause different psychological responses and result in different physiological changes in
different persons. Specifically, people with high levels of trait “negative affectivity” are more likely to respond with depression and
anxiety, compared with those who do not have such traits (19).
Patterns in different behavioral and physiological stress
responses, e.g., the offensive aggressive behavior, have been shown
as the best predictor for the individual susceptibility to many diseases
related to the immune system (20). For example, although the
connection between stress and heart disease was inconsistent, cynical
hostility has been shown as a consistent predictor in cardiovascular
diseases (21). Such observations demonstrate that personality
factors may be more important than the stressful environment
itself, as such factors can often be used for the prediction of health
outcomes regardless if stressful challenges exist or not.
In fact, causal connections have been established between
personality, health, diseases, and longevity (21). Multiple pathways
may be involved in the bidirectional interactions between personality and health conditions. For instance, unhealthy behavior patterns
such as poor diet habits, smoking, and lack of physical activity may
lead to physiological malfunctions and illnesses. Based on such
understanding, interventions on personalities may become necessary
or even more important than a single medication. Regular treatment of depression may not be useful for preventing heart diseases
even though depression has been associated with heart disease,
because personality factors may play a more important role (21).
Other factors in multiple dimensions such as time and life
experiences should also be considered for an integrative diagnosis
and intervention (see Fig. 1). For instance, even though conscientiousness has been shown as a critical predictor of longevity across
the full lifespan, simple interventions on un-conscientiousness may
not be possible or effective (21). Other factors should also be
considered, such as patterns of individual reactions and changes
over different timeframes in the lifespan.

8

Q. Yan

Furthermore, different human and socioeconomic factors
should be included to fill in the integrative map of personalized
medicine (see Fig. 1). Cognitive processes play a key role in the
physiological responses to the social world. Many factors have been
found to contribute to the association between poorer health and
lower socioeconomic status. These factors include higher exposure
to indoor allergens such as cockroach and mouse, as well as pollutants including tobacco smoke and diesel-related particles (22, 23).
Pollutants such as pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and industrial
contaminants may disrupt neuroendocrine pathways to affect the
ability to deal with stress and other challenges (24). In another
example, social status threat may induce a series of contextual,
psychological, and biological responses with health consequences
(6). Chronic social threats include discrimination, devaluation, or
rejection. According to the social threat conceptual model, the
exposure of chronic social threat may lead to a neural sensitivity
and disturb the neurohormonal pathways including the HPA
axis (6). Such exposure may result in elevated production of
proinflammatory cytokines and glucocorticoid alterations. These
changes may increase the risks of inflammatory activities and many
health disorders. The perceptions of social threat have been considered a mediator of these effects (6).
These observations have indicated that a comprehensive and
integrated biopsychosocial model needs to be established to provide a multi-dimensional framework (see Fig. 1). Such a framework
should link patterns of genetics, environments, personality, behaviors, health, diseases, and longevity in individuals within different
timeframes. To establish such a framework, approaches from
systems biology will be needed because a single factor or theory
will not meet with such demands. For example, models for a simple
HPA response to chronic stress have been found to be inappropriate
or insufficient (21). However, “A new wave of theories needs to be
developed to incorporate the moderating influences of timing,
nature of stress, controllability, and individual psychiatric response”
(25). Such theories based on systems biology methodologies
(also see Chapter 20) may help identify psychological and physiological patterns in PNI toward the establishment of personalized
medicine.

3. Stress and
Inflammation:
A Systems Biology
Perspective

Stress refers to environmental changes that may lead to disturbed
homeostasis (9). According to this definition, different individuals
may respond to a stressful stimulus or stressors differently. The
effects of the stressful stimulus may be varied, as they may cause
significant behavioral or physiological changes in one person while

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

9

little changes may happen to another person. The variability of
responses in different individuals may also depend on the coping
strategies and the adaptation to stressors. Current studies have
shown that stress responses can be beneficial and protective (9).
Adaptation is a learned process that may help the individual adjust
to future adverse conditions. However, chronic, repetitive, uncontrollable, and continued stress may lead to impaired adaptation. In such
conditions, hypercortisolism, hypertension, abnormal immune
responses, and psychological alterations may result in pathological
alterations in the brain. The changes in the HPA axis may further
lead to anxiety, depression, and psychotic disorders (9).
Complex mechanisms at various systems levels including the
endocrine and neurotransmitter systems are involved in the immune
responses to stress. Stress may result in negative emotions, increase
sympathetic hyperactivity, and enhance oxidative stress (6, 7, 16).
These mechanisms are mediated via cytokine receptors on endocrine cells and neurons, as well as hormone and neurotransmitter
receptors on cells of the immune system. Various molecules are
involved in these mechanisms, including catecholamines, glucocorticoids, endorphins, and other neuropeptides (9). Psychosocial
stress has been related to higher levels of inflammatory markers
including proinflammatory cytokines, the activation of inflammatory
pathways such as the NF-κB pathway, and impaired HPA axis regulation of inflammatory signaling pathways (26).
According to the biopsychosocial model, how an individual
understands and responds to the environment such as stressors
would have profound clinical meanings (17). The brain-immune
interactions play critical roles in health, wellness, and diseases. The
hyperactivity of the sympatho-adrenal system and the hypersecretion of the glucocorticoids related to chronic stress may cause
metabolic alterations that lead to diabetes, fat accumulation, and
hypertension. Stressful events and depression may affect food
choices, and usually stimulate less healthy choices (27). For example,
stress and depression were related with less fresh fruit consumption
but higher intake of snack foods in Chinese college students (28).
Stress also influences metabolic responses to foods (27). Stress may
change the gastroduodenal motility, disturb gastric emptying, and
alter intestinal transit and colonic motility (29). For example, acute
stress delayed the clearance of triglyceride after an intravenously
administered fat emulsion (30). After stimulation with a laboratory
stressor, it took averagely 14 % longer time for the clearance of an
exogenous fat load, compared with the non-stress controls (30).
The elucidation of the association between stress and
inflammation may contribute to the findings of treatments targeting the common inflammatory mechanisms in different diseases. This may help with the practice of personalized medicine,
i.e., the treatment of human beings rather than just a single disease. Inflammation may affect a spectrum of central nervous

10

Q. Yan

system (CNS) functions including neurotransmitter metabolism,
neuroendocrine function, and information processing (2).
Inflammation is also the common link among the leading causes
of death (31). For example, proinflammatory cytokines including
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and IL-1beta are critical elements in a spectrum of disorders such as cardiovascular disease, cancers, type II
diabetes, arthritis, osteoporosis, Alzheimer’s disease, skin disorders including psoriasis, and functional decline (11). The production of proinflammatory cytokines and other inflammatory
markers can be promoted by psychological stress and negative
emotions including depression, anxiety, as well as psychiatric diseases such as the post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) (32, 33).
For instance, chronic stress among caregivers of dementia relatives may lead to significantly higher levels of serum IL-6 (34).
Continued proinflammatory cytokine production caused by
stress and depression may be related to longer infectious time
and slower wound healing (35). Higher IL-6 response is related
to the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease via a combination
of autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine mechanisms (36).
In another example, life experience is also a critical factor (see
Fig. 1). Adults with a history of early-life stress have shown an
enhanced inflammatory response to acute stress challenges. Earlylife stress, especially childhood maltreatment has been considered a
risk factor for systemic inflammation in adulthood. Significantly
higher IL-6 concentrations in response to stress challenges were
observed among those who experienced moderate–severe childhood maltreatment, compared with the controls without the
maltreatment (33). Exposure to early-life stress may also increase
chances of adult obesity (37). In the connection between childhood
adverse experiences and poor adult physical and mental health,
inflammation has been found to be an important mediator.
In summary, the understanding of the associations between
stress and inflammation may help explain various health problems.
From the systems biology perspective, biological and environmental
factors at various levels have been found to account for chronic
inflammation and diseases (see Fig. 1). These factors include the
increased proinflammatory and decreased anti-inflammatory cytokines at the molecular level, as well as the signaling pathways and the
status of T-cell subpopulations at the cellular level (26). At the
systems and behavioral level, these factors include stress, dietary
intake, adiposity, and the bacterial composition of the gut microbiota (26). Chronic inflammation may become a common target
to prevent and treat many different diseases including cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, cancer, and depression. The clinical implications
of the connections among stress, inflammation, and various diseases
will be discussed in more detail in the next section.

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

4. Psychoneuroimmunology
and Translational
Medicine: Clinical
Implications

11

Based on the integrative paradigm and biopsychosocial model,
PNI can play an important role in translational medicine because it
provides the connection between basic scientific research and
clinical practice in various areas. Because of its multidisciplinary
characteristics, PNI may serve as the foundation for preventive
and personalized medicine over the next decade (2).
For instance, PNI can contribute to better nursing care by
supporting better caring and empathetic approaches (38, 39).
PNI-based framework has been shown helpful for guiding clinical
trials among patients with HIV and cancer for the evaluation of
nursing care in the processes of reducing stress and promoting
coping strategies (40). With the elucidation of the interactions
among behaviors, the neuroendocrine system, the immune system,
and their effects on clinical outcomes, PNI would allow health
practitioners to help their patients prevent infections and improve
the healing ability (41). For example, in intensive care units,
patients’ immune functions are often weakened by physiological
and psychological stressors such as trauma, pain, anxiety, fear, and
sleep deprivation (41). Physicians and nurses can use the PNI
models to help relieve the stresses among those patients.
Many evidences have supported the close relationship between
depression, inflammation, and other diseases. Although depression
is shown as a psychological problem, it has deep impact on the
immune system. For example, those with inflammatory diseases
including multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, cancers, rheumatoid arthritis,
and cardiovascular disease often have higher incidences of depression (42). People with chronic stress and depression often have elevated levels of inflammatory markers including IL-6, C-reactive
protein (CRP), TNF-α, and the endothelial activation marker
sICAM-1 (7). Depression may cause promoted proinflammatory
pathways and suppressed anti-inflammatory pathways (9). Those
who have been administered inflammatory cytokines such as interferon α (IFN-α) (for the treatment of disorders such as hepatitis C
and malignant melanoma) are more susceptible to develop depression. Because proinflammatory cytokines are involved in neurotransmitter metabolism, neuroendocrine functions, and synaptic plasticity,
they can interact with all of the pathophysiologic domains that are
associated with depression (42).
Chronic depression has been found to cause structural alterations at various levels correlated with other diseases. At the molecular
and cellular level, activated microglia cause higher production of
proinflammatory cytokines that may be involved in neurodegeneration (9). Lower production of neurotrophic factors including
BDNF may lead to decreased neuronal repair and increased loss of
neurons and astrocytes (9). At the tissue and organ level, lower

12

Q. Yan

volumes of the hippocampus, frontal cortex, and amygdalae have
been observed in chronically depressed patients. These changes
may provide linkages between depression and higher risks of
Alzheimer’s disease.
A bidirectional relationship has been established between obesity
and depression (42). For example, in women with severe or morbid
obesity, body mass index (BMI) (for measuring obesity) was positively related to inflammatory markers such as IL-6 and CRP (43).
These markers were also closely associated with depression and
anxiety. On the other hand, weight loss methods were found to
result in lower inflammation, reductions in inflammatory markers
especially CRP, as well as improvement in emotional status and
lower levels of anxiety (43). These findings have demonstrated
that inflammation is an important mediator of psychological
features of obese people.
Epidemiological studies have shown that the prevalence rates
of obesity and metabolic syndrome are especially high in those with
psychiatric disorders such as PTSD (44). Mediated through the
neuropeptide Y (NPY) and glucocorticoid systems, stress has been
found to increase the susceptibility to obesity and other metabolic
syndrome in mice fed with a high caloric diet (44). Changes in the
NPY and glucocorticoid systems can also influence behavioral
adaptation to stress. Investigation of the relationships between
these systems and stress has deep translational meanings for the
discovery of more effective prevention and treatment methods
for obesity and metabolic syndrome.
Furthermore, psychological stressors have been shown to play
crucial roles in the development of coronary artery disease (CAD)
via their effects on the immune system (45). Such stressors may
alter endothelial functions. Acute psychological stressors may cause
leukocytosis, elevated cytotoxicity of NK cells, and decreased
proliferative response to mitogens. However, chronic stressors may
result in adverse effects and alterations in cardiovascular functions.
Both acute and chronic stressors may affect hemostatic factors and
acute phase proteins, and result in thrombus formation and myocardial infarction (45). As depression may cause inflammation, the
combination of depression and inflammation may form complex
mechanisms to affect CAD. Studies have found that both depression and CRP are prognostic risk factors of acute coronary syndromes (46). Patients with either of the risk factors may benefit
from similar interventions such as exercises, antidepressants, and
healthy diets (7).
Cancer has also been closely related to stress. Stressors may
modulate the development of malignancies, and inhibit lymphocyte
proliferation and the activity of NK cells (1). However, stress reduction interventions such as relaxation training may prolong the survival of patients with metastatic neoplasms, possibly by modulating
the cytotoxic function and the functions of NK cells (1).

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

13

In addition, psychological stress is involved in the disease
activity in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Psychological stress may lead
to higher cardiovascular activity as well as adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) and cortisol levels, and the elevation in monocyte production of TNF-α among RA patients (47). On the other
hand, TNF-α antagonists may counteract the stress stimulation of
the inflammatory markers and serve as potential therapeutics for
RA. Such understanding would enable the findings of various
translational targets in the molecular networks of inflammation
and stress.
One of the most significantly influenced organs by emotional
factors is the skin. For example, psychological stress is closely correlated with wound healing. Stress has been shown to influence the
healing of various wound types, including both acute and chronic
wounds, as well as blister wounds and minor skin damages (47).
Patients of skin diseases often report a temporal relationship
between the occurrence of the disease and stressful life events (1).
Emotional stressors have been associated with many cutaneous
diseases such as acne, atopic eczema, herpes simplex infections,
psoriasis, and vitiligo (1). For example, emotional stressors may be
involved in the onset of psoriasis and precipitate flares. Psoriasis
patients with stress-related exacerbations often have malfunction in
the HPA axis. Such patients responded to experimental stressors
with higher blood pressure and heart rate (1). On the other hand,
many psychosocial interventions for reducing stress have been
shown to be beneficial in the treatment of psoriasis. These interventions include using meditation tapes during phototherapy
sessions for faster clearance of psoriasis, and the application of
hypnosis sessions (1).
Infections and infectious diseases are another group of disorders that are significantly influenced by stress conditions. Stressors
may have deleterious effects on bacterial infections of the skin (1).
Recurrent herpetic infection can be precipitated under the
influences of psychiatric diseases and life events. The development
of human infection with herpes simplex viruses may also be affected
by stress (1). However, chronic rather than acute stress has been
related to experimental viral infections. Another proof of the
connection between infections and psychological factors is that
psychosocial interventions have been found to reduce the recurrences of herpes simplex infections (1).
As a dynamic behavioral state, sleep plays an important role in
neuroendocrine activities and homeostasis. Sleep may have profound
influences on the immune system. For example, sleep disturbances
have been associated with decreased activities of NK cells, and
enhanced inflammatory markers in depressed patients (7). The
problem of insomnia and chronic sleep disturbances have been
related to altered levels of proinflammatory cytokines and cellular
immune responses. Experimental sleep loss may cause higher levels

14

Q. Yan

of inflammatory markers including IL-6, TNF, and CRP (7). The
protein NF-κB has been suggested to be a mediator of the
inflammatory responses. Poor sleep has been implied as a predictor
of cardiovascular disease and risks of other chronic diseases such as
arthritis and diabetes (7). The connection between sleep and
inflammation may provide translational implications because interventions targeting sleep problems may help inhibit inflammation
and prevent a spectrum of chronic diseases.

5. Psychoneuroimmunology,
Integrative
Interventions,
and Mind–Body
Medicine

With the understanding of the translational implications of PNI,
integrative interventions in multiple dimensions such as psychological and pharmaceutical approaches can be applied to modulate
stress responses and promote healthier behaviors (see Fig. 1).
Combination therapies can be designed with different mechanisms
applied, such as sensory, cognitive, expressive, and physical methods (48). For instance, more adaptive approaches of responding to
life challenges and better coping strategies can be trained for dealing with aging disorders (17). To achieve the objectives of personalized medicine, the utilizations of such systemic interactions and
feedbacks would promote health and wellness in the emotional,
intellectual, physical, social, spiritual, and environmental dimensions (4).
Based on the systems models, drugs can be designed for targeting the common pathways of different diseases, rather than for
targeting just a single disease. As mentioned above, this will also
help convert the disease-centered drugs to human-centered medicine,
the major task of personalized medicine. For instance, targeting
inflammatory markers such as IL-1 and IL-6, and targeting cytokine
signaling networks such as NF-κB and p38 MAPK pathways may be
useful for treating a wide range of diseases including depression,
cancer, and cardiovascular disease (2). Such approaches would also
enable novel drug combination strategies by using existing drugs
for better clinical results while saving the costs from new drug
development (4). For example, drugs such as etanercept, infliximab,
and anakinra have been traditionally applied for treating rheumatoid arthritis. However, these drugs also have potential effects on
disrupted mood status (49). Etanercept administration has been
shown to have beneficial effects on depression in psoriasis patients.
In addition to drugs, integrative interventions in multiple
dimensions such as diets and behaviors can also be used for targeting the common pathways of inflammation (see Fig. 1).
Psychological stress and depression have been associated with
inflammation via the same pathways, by influencing food choices
and stimulating maladaptive metabolic responses to unhealthy
diets (27). Certain diets promote inflammation, including those

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

15

high in refined starches, sugar, and saturated fats (50). On the
other hand, vegetables and fruits have antioxidant and antiinflammatory properties. Diets may influence inflammatory factors
and dietary-related inflammation may enhance depression, while
depression can in turn promote inflammation. With such understanding of the diet-immune–stress interactions, systemic interventions using diets can then be applied to inhibit inflammation and
reduce stress. For example, the Mediterranean dietary pattern has
been found to have protective effects for the prevention of
depression (51).
In another example, arachidonic-acid-derived (omega-6) eicosanoids can enhance the production of proinflammatory cytokines
(52). Dietary sources of omega-6 eicosanoids include refined vegetable oils, e.g., corn, sunflower, and safflower oils. However, the
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids can inhibit the production
of arachidonic-acid-derived eicosanoids (53). Higher “omega6:omega-3” ratios may lead to higher proinflammatory cytokine
production. For example, depression has been related to higher
omega-6:omega-3 ratios (53). On the other hand, nutritional
supplements of omega-3 fatty acid may have beneficial effects on
mood, vagal tone, and inflammation (54). Such supplements may
suppress the activation of NF-κB and responses to endotoxin to
modulate inflammatory responses (27). Dietary sources of
omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids include fish oil, wheat germ,
and flax seeds.
In addition, among the elderly people, those with poor mental
and physical health conditions have been found to have decreased
circulating levels of alpha-tocopherol, with elevations of the
inflammatory markers such as IL-6 and CRP (55). Because nutritional factors such as vitamin E are closely associated with immune
functions and life quality, they should be considered as important
interventions for targeting both mental and physical disorders.
Moreover, interventions that involve behavioral and mindbody strategies would be effective for relieving depression and
reducing inflammation. For example, mindfulness meditation
training has been shown to reduce stress. In HIV-1 patients,
meditation training was able to buffer the declination of CD4+ T
lymphocyte (56). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT)
may relieve residual depressive symptoms and prevent depression
relapse (57, 58). MBCT is a program that integrates cognitivebehavioral therapy and mindfulness-based stress reduction. The
practice of MBCT was also found useful for decreasing anxiety
symptoms in those with bipolar disorder, as well as in patients
with anxiety disorders (58). Another meditation technique that
includes a mindfulness element is compassion meditation, which
was found to reduce IL-6 inflammatory responses induced by a
psychosocial laboratory stressor (59). Meditation practices have
been suggested to influence physiological pathways that are
involved in stress and diseases.

16

Q. Yan

Even short-term meditation may significantly improve
physiological reactions in heart rate, respiratory amplitude and
rate, and skin conductance response (SCR) (60). For example,
compared with the relaxation control, 5 days of integrative body–
mind training (IBMT) resulted in better regulation of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) by a ventral midfrontal brain system
(60). In addition, yogic cognitive-behavioral practices such as
meditation, yoga asanas, and pranayama breathing have been found
to influence humoral factors, nervous system activity, and cell
trafficking (61). Yogic practices have many beneficial effects on
health such as delaying aging and relieving chronic illness and stress
from disability. Such practices may help improve homeostatic negative feedback loops in molecular and cellular interactions (61).
These observations have demonstrated that integrative interventions can be effective for targeting the potential markers for the
optimal therapeutic results.
Furthermore, combination interventions have been found
effective in the treatment of depression and related health problems.
For example, lifestyle modifications, exercises, and weight loss methods were beneficial for relieving symptoms of depression (62, 63).
Exercise has anti-inflammatory effects that may lead to decreased
body fat and macrophage accumulation in adipose tissue, with the
reduction of inflammatory markers (64). In a study examining the
effect of laughter on stress, saliva samples were collected from
healthy people before and after watching a comic film or a nonhumorous control film (65). The study found that the stress score
reduced significantly following watching the comic film. These
results confirmed that laughter has a stress relief effect.
In conclusion, PNI may play a central role for the translation
of the scientific discoveries in various disciplines into personalized
medicine. Using systems biology approaches, complex mechanisms
involved in the interactions such as inflammation, stress, and diseases
can be elucidated. Based on the biopsychosocial model, patient
patterns and systemic psychological and physiological profiles can
be established for more accurate diagnosis and prognosis. Such
approaches will contribute to the identification of systemic targets
and the development of integrative interventions for achieving
health and wellness in multiple dimensions.
References
1. Tausk F, Elenkov I, Moynihan J (2008)
Psychoneuroimmunology. Dermatol Ther
21:22–31
2. Yan Q (2011) Translation of psychoneuroimmunology into personalized medicine: a systems biology perspective. Per Med 8:641–649
3. Prolo P, Chiappelli F, Fiorucci A et al (2002)
Psychoneuroimmunology: new avenues of

research for the twenty-first century. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 966:400–408
4. Yan Q (2011) Toward the integration of personalized and systems medicine: challenges,
opportunities and approaches. Per Med 8:1–4
5. Zachariae R (2009) Psychoneuroimmunology:
a bio-psycho-social approach to health and disease. Scand J Psychol 50(6):645–651

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

6. Kemeny ME (2009) Psychobiological responses
to social threat: evolution of a psychological
model in psychoneuroimmunology. Brain
Behav Immun 23:1–9
7. Irwin MR (2008) Human psychoneuroimmunology: 20 years of discovery. Brain Behav
Immun 22:129–139
8. Ader R (2000) On the development of psychoneuroimmunology. Eur J Pharmacol 405:
167–176
9. Leonard BE, Myint A (2009) The psychoneuroimmunology
of
depression.
Hum
Psychopharmacol 24:165–175
10. Ziemssen
T,
Kern
S
(2007)
Psychoneuroimmunology—cross-talk between
the immune and nervous systems. J Neurol
254(suppl 2):II8–II11
11. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, McGuire L, Robles TF et al
(2002) Psychoneuroimmunology: psychological influences on immune function and health.
J Consult Clin Psychol 70:537–547
12. Goncharova LB, Tarakanov AO (2007)
Molecular networks of brain and immunity.
Brain Res Rev 55(1):155–166
13. Touma C (2011) Stress and affective disorders:
animal models elucidating the molecular basis
of
neuroendocrine-behavior
interactions.
Pharmacopsychiatry 44(suppl 1):S15–S26
14. Kiecolt-Glaser JK (2009) Psychoneuroimmunology psychology’s gateway to the
biomedical future. Perspect Psychol Sci 4:
367–369
15. Fang CY, Miller SM, Bovbjerg DH et al (2008)
Perceived stress is associated with impaired
T-cell response to HPV16 in women with cervical dysplasia. Ann Behav Med 35:87–96
16. Alford L (2007) Findings of interest from
immunology and psychoneuroimmunology.
Man Ther 12:176–180
17. Lutgendorf SK, Costanzo ES (2003)
Psychoneuroimmunology and health psychology: an integrative model. Brain Behav Immun
17:225–232
18. Kemeny ME, Schedlowski M (2007)
Understanding the interaction between psychosocial stress and immune-related diseases: a
stepwise progression. Brain Behav Immun
21:1009–1018
19. Kemeny ME, Laudenslager ML (1999)
Introduction beyond stress: the role of individual difference factors in psychoneuroimmunology. Brain Behav Immun 13:73–75
20. Koolhaas JM (2008) Coping style and immunity in animals: making sense of individual variation. Brain Behav Immun 22:662–667
21. Friedman HS (2008) The multiple linkages of
personality and disease. Brain Behav Immun
22:668–675

17

22. Friedman EM, Lawrence DA (2002)
Environmental stress mediates changes in neuroimmunological interactions. Toxicol Sci
67:4–10
23. Wright RJ, Subramanian SV (2007) Advancing
a multilevel framework for epidemiologic
research on asthma disparities. Chest
132(suppl):757S–769S
24. Waye A, Trudeau VL (2011) Neuroendocrine
disruption: more than hormones are upset. J
Toxicol Environ Health B Crit Rev 14:
270–291
25. Miller GE, Chen E, Zhou ES (2007) If it goes
up, must it come down? Chronic stress and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in
humans. Psychol Bull 133:25–45
26. Haroon E, Raison CL, Miller AH (2012)
Psychoneuroimmunology meets neuropsychopharmacology: translational implications of
the impact of inflammation on behavior.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37:137–162
27. Kiecolt-Glaser JK (2010) Stress, food, and
inflammation: psychoneuroimmunology and
nutrition at the cutting edge. Psychosom Med
72:365–369
28. Liu C, Xie B, Chou CP et al (2007) Perceived
stress, depression and food consumption frequency in the college students of China Seven
Cities. Physiol Behav 92:748–754
29. Yin J, Levanon D, Chen JDZ (2004) Inhibitory
effects of stress on postprandial gastric myoelectrical activity and vagal tone in healthy
subjects.
Neurogastroenterol
Motil
16:737–744
30. Stoney CM, West SG, Hughes JW et al (2002)
Acute psychological stress reduces plasma triglyceride
clearance.
Psychophysiology
39:80–85
31. Aggarwal BB, Shishodia S, Sandur SK et al
(2006) Inflammation and cancer: how hot is
the link? Biochem Pharmacol 72:1605–1621
32. Segerstrom SC, Miller GE (2004) Psychological
stress and the human immune system: a metaanalytic study of 30 years of inquiry. Psychol
Bull 130:1–37
33. Carpenter LL, Gawuga CE, Tyrka AR et al
(2010) Association between plasma IL-6
response to acute stress and early-life adversity
in healthy adults. Neuropsychopharmacology
35:2617–2623
34. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Preacher KJ, MacCallum
RC et al (2003) Chronic stress and age-related
increases in the proinflammatory cytokine
IL-6. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:
9090–9095
35. Glaser R, Kiecolt-Glaser JK (2005) Stressinduced immune dysfunction: implications for
health. Nat Rev Immunol 5:243–251

18

Q. Yan

36. Yudkin JS, Kumari M, Humphries SE et al
(2000) Inflammation, obesity, stress and coronary heart disease: is interleukin-6 the link?
Atherosclerosis 148:209–214
37. D’Argenio A, Mazzi C, Pecchioli L et al (2009)
Early trauma and adult obesity: is psychological
dysfunction the mediating mechanism? Physiol
Behav 98:543–546
38. Langley P, Fonseca J, Iphofen R (2006)
Psychoneuroimmunology and health from a
nursing perspective. Br J Nurs 15:1126–1129
39. Starkweather A, Witek-Janusek L, Mathews
HL (2005) Applying the psychoneuroimmunology framework to nursing research. J
Neurosci Nurs 37:56–62
40. McCain NL, Gray DP, Walter JM et al (2005)
Implementing a comprehensive approach to
the study of health dynamics using the psychoneuroimmunology paradigm. ANS Adv
Nurs Sci 28:320–332
41. DeKeyser F (2003) Psychoneuroimmunology
in critically ill patients. AACN Clin Issues
14:25–32
42. Shelton RC, Miller AH (2010) Eating ourselves to death (and despair): the contribution
of adiposity and inflammation to depression.
Prog Neurobiol 91:275–299
43. Capuron L, Poitou C, Machaux-Tholliez D
et al (2010) Relationship between adiposity,
emotional status and eating behaviour in obese
women: role of inflammation. Psychol Med
41:1517–1528
44. Rasmusson AM, Schnurr PP, Zukowska Z,
Scioli E et al (2010) Adaptation to extreme
stress: post-traumatic stress disorder, neuropeptide Y and metabolic syndrome. Exp Biol
Med 235:1150–1162
45. Ho RCM, Neo LF, Chua ANC et al (2010)
Research on psychoneuroimmunology: does
stress influence immunity and cause coronary
artery disease? Ann Acad Med Singapore
39:191–196
46. Frasure-Smith N, Lesperance F, Irwin MR et al
(2007) Depression, C-reactive protein and
two-year major adverse cardiac events in men
after acute coronary syndromes. Biol Psychiatry
62:302–308
47. Motivala SJ, Khanna D, FitzGerald J et al
(2008) Stress activation of cellular markers
of inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis:
protective effects of tumor necrosis factor
alpha antagonists. Arthritis Rheum 58:
376–383
48. Bauer-Wu SM (2002) Psychoneuroimmunology.
Part II: mind-body interventions. Clin J Oncol
Nurs 6:243–246

49. Irwin MR, Miller AH (2007) Depressive disorders and immunity: 20 years of progress and
discovery. Brain Behav Immun 21:374–383
50. Giugliano D, Ceriello A, Esposito K (2006)
The effects of diet on inflammation—emphasis
on the metabolic syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol
48:677–685
51. Sanchez-Villegas A, Delgado-Rodriguez M,
Alonso A et al (2009) Association of the
Mediterranean dietary pattern with the incidence of depression: the Seguimiento
Universidad de Navarra/University of Navarra
Follow-up (SUN) cohort. Arch Gen Psychiatry
66:1090–1098
52. van West D, Maes M (2003) Polyunsaturated
fatty acids in depression. Acta Neuropsychiatr
15:15–21
53. Pischon T, Hankinson SE, Hotamisligil GS
et al (2003) Habitual dietary intake of n-3 and
n-6 fatty acids in relation to inflammatory
markers among U.S. men and women.
Circulation 108:155–160
54. Hibbeln JR, Nieminen L, Blasbalg TL et al
(2006) Healthy intakes of n-3 and n-6 fatty
acids: estimations considering worldwide diversity. Am J Clin Nutr 83:1483S–1493S
55. Capuron L, Moranis A, Combe N et al (2009)
Vitamin E status and quality of life in the
elderly: influence of inflammatory processes.
Br J Nutr 102:1390–1394
56. Creswell JD, Myers HF, Cole SW et al (2009)
Mindfulness meditation training effects on
CD4+ T lymphocytes in HIV-1 infected adults:
a small randomized controlled trial. Brain
Behav Immun 23:184–188
57. Bondolfi G, Jermann F, der Linden MV et al
(2010) Depression relapse prophylaxis with
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy: replication and extension in the Swiss health care system. J Affect Disord 122:224–231
58. Chiesa A, Serretti A (2010) Mindfulness based
cognitive therapy for psychiatric disorders: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry
Res 187:441–453
59. Pace TW, Negi LT, Adame DD et al (2009)
Effect of compassion meditation on neuroendocrine, innate immune and behavioral
responses to psychosocial stress. Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:87–98
60. Tang YY, Ma Y, Fan Y et al (2009) Central and
autonomic nervous system interaction is altered
by short-term meditation. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 106:8865–8870
61. Kuntsevich V, Bushell WC, Theise ND (2010)
Mechanisms of yogic practices in health, aging,
and disease. Mt Sinai J Med 77:559–569

1

The Role of Psychoneuroimmunology in Personalized and Systems Medicine

62. Fabricatore AN, Wadden TA, Higginbotham
AJ et al (2011) Intentional weight loss and
changes in symptoms of depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Obes (Lond)
35:1363–1376
63. Barbour KA, Blumenthal JA (2005) Exercise
training and depression in older adults.
Neurobiol Aging 26(suppl 1):119–123

19

64. Woods JA, Vieira VJ, Keylock KT (2009)
Exercise, inflammation, and innate immunity.
Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 29:
381–393
65. Toda M, Kusakabe S, Nagasawa S et al (2007)
Effect of laughter on salivary endocrinological
stress marker chromogranin A. Biomed Res
28:115–118

Chapter 2
Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension
Elling Ulvestad
Abstract
Accumulating evidence has made clear that experience—the knowledge an individual acquires during a
lifetime of sensing and acting—is of fundamental biological relevance. Experience makes an impact on all
adaptive systems, including the endocrine, immune, and nerve systems, and is of the essence, not only for
the unfolding of an organisms’ healthy status, but also for the development of malfunctional traits.
Nevertheless, experience is often excluded from empirical approaches. A variety of complex interactions
that influence life histories are thereby neglected. Such ignorance is especially detrimental for psychoneuroimmunology, the science that seeks to understand how the exquisite and dynamic interplay between
mind, body, and environment relates to behavioral characteristics. The article reviews claims for incorporating experience as a member of good explanatory standing in biology and medicine, and more specifically,
claims that experiential knowledge is required to enable meaningful and relevant explanations and predictions in the psychoneuroimmunological realm.
Key words: Experience, Microbiome,
Psychoneuroimmunology, Immune

Umwelt,

Development,

Evolution,

Function,

1. Introduction
Ideas that the nervous, immune, and endocrine systems work in
close concert with each other as well as with external inputs were
not in high vogue prior to the 1980s. Scientists were still preoccupied with elaborations of the internal workings of the three adaptive systems, and rarely made cross-over connections. That such an
integrative effort would be rewarding was, however, highlighted
in a 1981 landmark publication entitled Psychoneuroimmunology
(1). The book, edited by Robert Ader, consisted of a collection of
reviews on emerging work, and made a fascinating but also a challenging reading.

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_2, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

21

22

E. Ulvestad

In the book’s foreword, Robert A. Good (2) outlined a research
agenda for the integrative efforts that should follow:
The question that remains is how these three major networks—the
nervous system, the endocrine system, and the immunologic system—
interact and, how, by understanding these interactions in precise quantitative terms, we can learn to predict and control them (2, p. xix).

In the immediate follow-up article, Psychosocial factors in infectious disease, S. Michael Plaut and Stanford B. Friedman (3) additionally stated that psychoneuroimmunology needs to understand
how various psychosocial factors of the experiencing subject can
modify external challenges. They thus elaborated further on an
often observed phenomenon—that not all individuals infected
with a certain infectious agent come down with disease—and
emphasized that there must be “something more” involved in
pathogenesis than just a battle between the infectious agent and
the immune system. They made references to results from human
studies which demonstrated that the meaning a person attaches to
a phenomenon makes an impact on disease outcome, and so
claimed that:
The relevant question is not whether a given disease is caused by a
pathogenic agent or by psychological factors, but rather to what extent
the disease can be related to each of a number of factors in the history,
makeup, and environment of the organism (3, p. 7).

By this claim they highlighted a shift in research focus—not
only should scientists investigate why individuals are susceptible to
illness, they should as well investigate why individuals are resistant
to disease. The “received view,” that infectious agents and psychological stressors are sufficient causes of disease, should therefore be
replaced with a more comprehensive and interdisciplinary understanding of causation.
The challenge posed by Plaut and Friedman—that the human
organism’s life history needs to be included in the explanatory
framework—is demanding. For not only did the two researchers
claim that the life history should be approached from a scientific
viewpoint, it should in addition be approached from the individual’s perspective—from the meaning the susceptible person and his
adaptive systems attach to precipitating situations. These are hard
tasks indeed—for they ask of science more than science is allowed
to deliver, the reason being that science in its “craving for generality” actually takes a “contemptuous attitude towards the particular
case” (4, p. 18).
This idea can be explicated by way of a dilemma from scientific
publishing. On the one hand, editors are reluctant to communicate
case reports because cases are subject to a variety of uncontrolled
and uncontrollable influences, and so generalization of the individual outcome is a precarious undertaking. On the other hand,
editors endorse group-based investigations, because such studies

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

23

are amenable to strict control and thus generalization. However, as
publishers well know—results from group-based investigations
lack an important virtue of the case. Individual characteristics and
contextual parameters are seldom irrelevant for the outcome, and
by treating these as confounders, group-based studies thereby
neglect the experiential dimension and thus lose touch with the
very individuals they represent.
Even a science that acknowledges the experiential dimension
and thus attempts to incorporate experiential parameters in the
form of major life events—e.g., divorce, death of a spouse, or serious disease—often fails the task. As highlighted in a critical review,
individuals rarely apply the same meaning to a life event (5).
Different subjects interpret events differently, and this differential
interpretation is a determinant of how individuals respond psychoendocrinologically. The “objective” characteristics of an event,
which are foundational in group-based investigations, are thus not
objective in a strict sense—they are rather interpreted in an idiosyncratic manner by each different participator.
Knowledge of group characteristics is highly relevant but nevertheless insufficient for understanding the individual, and it thus
appears that science needs a theory of the organism that also allows
for the emergence of “private” responses. This does not, however,
imply that science should become subjective and so comply with
the slogan “anything goes.” Science’s ultimate task is to give objective accounts of nature, also of individual experience. To stay true
to its ideal, science should therefore give well grounded accounts of
subjective experience. Subjective accounts of experience, although
important for individual behavior, are nevertheless, at least for the
time being, outside the scientific realm.
In the following I will provide an exploration of the challenge
posed by Plaut and Friedman. In so doing I will invoke the age old
dilemma between the one and the many, and investigate how this
applies to the objective perspective taken by an external observer
and to the subjective perspective of a participant. The importance
of the subject’s environment, exemplified by the microbial communities of our intestines, will also be highlighted, as will the role
of subjective interpretations of environmental stimuli over the life
cycle. These deliberations will hopefully reveal the complexity of
the experiential challenges facing psychoneuroimmunology.

2. The Meaning
of Perception
A good starter for objective appropriation of subjective experiences
can be found in the Estonian zoologist Jakob von Uexküll’s (1864–
1944) elaborations on the individual organism’s dealing with nature.
When confronted with contemporary views of the organism, Uexküll

24

E. Ulvestad

noted a discrepancy between what he believed was the animal’s
world—an active organism that interacts with its surroundings in a
meaningful manner, and the scientific conceptualization of it—an
animal that mechanically adapts its behavior to a given environment. To rectify this incongruity, he set out to build a new biology
in which the animal’s perspective was retained (6). And in so doing,
he came to emphasize the importance of perception. As he saw it, the
animal’s perceptual perspective is not something gained by passively receiving inputs in the shape of information; rather, it involves
an active interpretation of signals rendered meaningful by the animal’s previous experiences.
Upon portraying animals as developmental structures with
communicative capabilities, Uexküll also came to notify that environmental stimuli are of unequal importance for different kinds of
animals. He thus elaborated a distinction between the animal’s
environment, i.e., its physical surroundings, and the animal’s
Umwelt—the meaning-carrying structure that contains a “sign or
symbol that members of the same species can understand, but that
those of another species cannot comprehend” (7, p. 77). Hence,
even though animals of different species may share the same environment, their differing Umwelts make them experience the same
environment differently.
By emphasizing the animal’s perspective, Uexküll reached a
surprising insight—environmental signals are already meaningful as
they reach the animal. To see how this may come about, one has to
think of the couplings between organisms and their surroundings
as emerging from activity played out during two distinct temporalities—one during the evolutionary history of the species, when
perceptual abilities are being shaped, and the other during the
developmental history of the individual, when the same perceptual
capabilities are being structured in relation to external inputs.
Perception of the Umwelt thus consists of a phylogenetic component, which allows for a fairly stereotyped pattern of behavior,
and an ontogenetic component that serves to diversify and tailor
each organism’s behavior to the actual environment (Fig. 1) (8).
Although Uexküll initially received many followers, including
the ethologist Konrad Lorentz and the philosopher on human
experience Martin Heidegger, his work had vitalistic undertones
and was therefore regarded unscientific. His emphasis on the qualitative aspects of animal perception and behavior were therefore
soon replaced by more quantitative and mathematically oriented
theories, and investigations related to the organism’s perceptual
couplings to the environment were thereby relayed to the background. However, much of this changed in the 1970s when
Uexküll’s ideas were revitalized by the emerging field of biosemiotics (9), and not the least by neurophysiologists and immunologists
who began to reorient their investigations along similar integrative
lines. To achieve the most from universalizing investigations, while
at the same time avoiding loss of the individual, it would thus be

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

25

Fig. 1. Each individual is the result of the lineage’s adaptive processes during evolutionary time and adaptive processes
during developmental time. These two adaptive processes are integrated in every organism. The concave lens depicts the
evolutionary resources of the organism, and includes its genetic make-up. The convex lens, in contrast, depicts the developmentally shaped resources of the organism, including the epigenetic make-up and the wirings of the central nervous
system, the immune system, and the endocrine system. The Umwelt makes up the context in which the experiences make
their impact. Dependent upon how these systems integrate within the organism, the response may turn out as functional
or dysfunctional. And, since the organism’s responses are in many ways instructive of latter responses, the responses are
depicted to feed back to alter both the Umwelt and latter responses to the same or dissimilar challenges.

fruitful to integrate psychoneuroimmunology with the biosemiotic
view of the world. But as humans differ from other animals in
several respects, the Uexküllian path needs to be adapted to the
specific human trajectory and situation.

3. The Human
Umwelt
Compared to other mammals and primates, humans differ in several respects. Human life stories are distinguished by having an
exceptionally long life span, an extended period of juvenile dependence, and support of reproduction by older postreproductive
females as well as by males (10). In contrast to other animals, with
the exception of primates, humans also possess specific brain structures that enable them to experience and interpret internal physiological processes (11). When such processes, which may be pain,
motion, nausea, thirst or hunger, reach consciousness, they create
a subjective experience of own body. Variations in this structure
may thus be part of the explanation for the great variation of experience of a given bodily state by different humans (12).
Human beings are also distinguished by having unique psychological characteristics—a capacity for self-reflection, for designing
sophisticated symbolic structures, for attaching metaphorical
concepts to experiences and for building models and categories
with the aid of the imagination. There is thus a creative element in

26

E. Ulvestad

man’s dealing with his world—our brains create “a fantasy that
coincides with reality” (13, p. 111). And exceptionally—when this
reality seems unfit, humans additionally have the capacity to alter
the same reality in radical ways during a process termed niche construction (14). Man’s Umwelt is thus not only ecological, but also
cultural—all the way (15). And as culture is an important part of
man’s Umwelt, it should not come unexpected that artifacts of
culture may act as a selective force, thus feeding back on human
beings in a form strong enough to even alter the genome (16).
In the same vein, alterations in perception and thought processes
feedback on the brain, thus altering neurophysiological and neurochemical activities involved in perception, action, and emotional
control (17)—thus mind matters in a literal sense.
Man’s experiences are not entirely determined by the way the
world is—man is himself active in acquisition, selection, interpretation, and organization of the information. And as culture is shaped
as a cooperative effort along the generations, the human organism
is always and without exception a lived body in which history and
biography are woven together with interpersonal meaning as well
as individual purpose. While humans create and convey meaning in
coexistence with other humans, every person nevertheless interprets experience within his own horizon which only partly coincides with “all the others,” even within the same cultural circle or
society. Such interpretation does not disappear in reality, even when
scientific methodology excludes these elements from the study—
and thereby from science (18).
By disregarding experience, science also disregards the effects
of culture on human action. Since the meaning of a situation has
strong cultural bindings—something regarded as an upsetting
event in one culture may go quite unnoticed in another—there are
reasons to anticipate a major contribution of culture to variation in
psychoneuroimmunological development and function. The habit
of including a relatively homogenous group of participants from
Western, Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic (WEIRD)
societies in psychoneuroimmunological studies thus effectively
precludes the chance of understanding variation across human
populations (19). There are even reasons to believe that these
WEIRD individuals are amongst the least representative members
one could use to generalize across human populations.

4. Restructuring
the Explanatory
Gap

Human beings come into the world with naturally selected coping
mechanisms. And since these mechanisms have evolutionary preconditions, it is a task for science to ask whether or not such preconditions interfere with man’s perception of the Umwelt in a true manner.

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

27

There are two reasons why this question is important—first, a science
that aims to understand humans has to know how humans experience the world and second, a science that aims to understand the
world must have an idea of science’s own foundations for knowledge acquisition. Exactly such preconditions and preconceptions
have been given critical attention by researchers in the phenomenological tradition (20) and their investigations are thus in many
ways supplementary to the Uexküllian tradition.
The phenomenological tradition has made huge efforts to
understand the human experiential dimension and thus make it
accessible to investigation. As the phenomenologist sees it, any biological individual accesses the Umwelt through a first-person perspective. For humans, this is the world as they know it, imbued with
meaning and emotions. Any human being has access to a wide range
of historically situated knowledge that helps him to respond to external challenges in a meaningful way. The knowledge of each generation is different, and knowledge also differs in different parts of the
world. Such knowledge is therefore spatiotemporally restricted.
But human beings can also access knowledge that is true irrespective of time and place. To obtain such valued knowledge, man
has to “bracket” his first-person perspective on the world. He has
to take a God-like perspective, be the spectator who takes a view
from nowhere. The third-person perspective, which is the foundational view of science, is not easily achieved. To reach the goal of
true knowledge, scientists have to act as disinterested, emotionless,
and neutral observers, and so have to undergo a long and arduous
training to achieve control over their inborn perceptual capabilities. This is a complicated task, as they have to erase some of their
developmentally learned presuppositions.
The degree to which the third-person perspective can be
achieved varies widely between the sciences. While mathematicians
and logicians can be trained to master their subject in a true “disinterested” manner, it is more questionable whether biologists,
social scientists, and humanists can achieve the same degree of perfection. And for a simple reason—biological entities, including
human beings, are historically situated; they have a history that
matters as to what and who they are. That biological entities,
including the nervous, immune, and endocrine systems, have a history, does not, however, imply that they elude investigation by a
science with universalizing ambitions. But it does imply that science should make more precise which aspects of the historical entities it can reach firm conclusions about and which it cannot.
Although an arduous task, especially since science constantly
develops new concepts and exploratory technologies that push
the line of demarcation between knowledge and ignorance, it
does appear evident, at least for the time being, that science cannot reach the innermost experiences of an individual. Science
can for example explore the general effects of major life events,

28

E. Ulvestad

but how each individual experiences a divorce or the loss of a
beloved one is a private matter. It thus appears necessary to make
an analytic distinction between a public first-person perspective,
which is amenable for scientific investigations, and a private firstperson perspective which is not. The private perspective is a
specific characteristic of each individual, be it a human being or
a perceptual system. And as such, it has no characteristics that
can be generalized—it is thus located beyond the realms of science. The public first-person perspective is, on the other hand,
accessible from the outside. It includes perceptual traits that are
specific for a given species, and is as such co-extensional with the
animal’s Umwelt.
While the public first-person aspect can be made explicit by
means of genetic, environmental, and developmental investigations, the private first-person aspect is an experiential dimension
and as such not accessible for scientific investigation. Such experience does not lend itself easily to standardized interpretation; it is
always an experience of something for someone, in a unique context. There is thus a gap between what science can explain and
what it cannot—and the gap goes straight through the individual,
between the private and public aspects of the first-person.
Nonetheless, exactly where the line of accessibility should be drawn
is a matter on which science should have a saying. The explanatory
gap should be made more precise, but prospects for its closing are
for the time being dim.

5. Relations:
All the Way
Some of the most surprising knowledge coming out of the genomics research programs has been novel insights into man’s relations
with the environment as well as to himself. Not only have the
sequencing efforts yielded rich empirical crops, they have in addition highlighted the importance of different analytic perspectives.
The latter is perhaps made most apparent by recent efforts to
understand relations between hosts and their microbes.
Ever since the microbiological revolution in the late eighteen
hundreds, led by Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch, microbes have
been conceptualized as external enemies against which man had to
fight a war. Although the perspective has been extremely rewarding in terms of lives saved by vaccines and antibiotics, the war metaphor has been seriously misleading as an aid to understand man’s
microbial Umwelt. Only about 100 microbial species regularly
infect human beings and cause disease, while millions of others
either ignore us or they cooperate with us in an evolutionary
selected manner, thus making their absence—not their presence—
the real problem.

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

29

Several new observations derived from investigations of the
human genome as well as from the microbial communities that
colonize our mucous membranes and skin have made evident that
it is no longer possible to conceptualize microbes as simply “external.” They are internal and cooperative as well. The sequencing of
the human genome made clear that our chromosomes are teemed
with microbially derived elements. The genome consists of 45%
transposons—DNA sequences that are able to copy and move
within chromosomes—of which approximately 8% are retroviruslike (21). Some of these retroviral integrations have been of great
importance for vertebrate physiological development. Although
most transposons that accumulate in the genome have no known
function, they contribute a large potential substrate for the evolution and development of regulatory networks (22, 23).
The genome also contains bacterially derived DNA, some of
which regulates the interaction between the eukaryotic cells and
their bacterially derived mitochondrial symbionts. The mitochondria, which have evolved to become an integral part of the host’s
cells, have transferred some of their genes to the cell’s nucleus.
And in so doing, they lost the ability to reproduce freely. This loss
has, however, been matched by a comparative gain in survival
capacity—mitochondria, by their very location, have become
shielded off from immune destruction. The importance of keeping
the interaction between the eukaryotic cell and its mitochondria
tightly regulated is dramatically spelled out during debilitating
physical trauma in which mitochondria relocate or become
destroyed. This leads to a breakdown of the conditions for cooperation between the host cell and the symbiont, and the host may
thus develop a dangerous systemic inflammatory response. The
response includes fever, low blood pressure and increased heart
rate (24), and is thus analogous to the inflammatory process
observed as a result of contaminating bacteria during sepsis.
Another surprising observation that came out of the sequencing of the human genome was the relative paucity of genes. Based
on complexity estimates, man was thought to have about 100,000
genes prior to the sequencing. But only about 25,000 genes were
detected. Man was as complex as before, so how could the complexity be accounted for by so few genes? One answer has to do
with the way the DNA is used for making proteins and regulatory
factors, and it has turned out that this process is far more efficient
than first thought (25). But this is not the whole story; additional
data have since revealed that humans also have access to a plethora
of genes not coded for in the genome. And these genes, which are
located within bacteria and viruses on the skin and the mucous
membranes, by far outnumber the genes in the cellular nucleus.
Estimates have indicated that an adult human being is composed of
1013 eukaryotic and 1014 prokaryotic cells, and human beings can
thus be described as super-organisms consisting of 90% prokaryotic

30

E. Ulvestad

and 10% eukaryotic cells. Since every bacterium may be infected
with as many as 100 bacteriophages, thus giving an estimate of ten
billion viruses in each gram of human feces, there is definitely a
plethora of genes availably within the human niche (26, 27).
The community of intestinal microbes, termed the microbiota,
which establishes itself shortly after birth, reaches adult levels in
early childhood. Although influenced by changes in diet and life
events, the microbiota appears to be relatively resilient to alterations caused by stressful life events and antibiotic treatments. Its
non-random organization depends on both host genetics and environmental exposure of microbes (28–30), but relatively little is
known about the rules of its assembly or how the human body
controls microbiota composition (31). Neither is much known
about what constitutes a healthy microbiome—the collection of
genes in these organisms—nor on how this in turn influences
human health. Nevertheless, evidence increasingly converge on the
hypothesis that gut microbes may shape the host metabolic and
immune systems and thus influence the development of obesity,
diabetes, and other inflammatory diseases (32, 33).
It is by now well established that the microbiota regulates the
developing immune system (34), and that it likely played a critical
role in the evolution of the adaptive immune system (35). There is
also accumulating evidence demonstrating that the gut microbiota
can modulate brain development and thus behavior. For example,
a recent study revealed that mice raised in germ-free conditions
have significantly increased motor activity and decreased anxiety as
compared to mice with normally colonized intestines (36).
Furthermore, when re-colonized with microbes, the developmental deficits in the germ-free pups normalized while re-colonization
of adult germ-free mice did not, thus suggesting that there is a
developmental window during which the microbiota is critical to
brain development.
The mechanisms by which the gut microbiota effectuate
changes in synaptic connections, which provide the essential substrate for functional brain networks that underlie perception, cognition, and action, are still not known. But since the microbiota
has an effect on immune cells, it seems likely that some of the
effects are mediated by signals from these cells. This interpretation
is supported by evidence showing that the immune system is capable of modulating brain function both during development and
adulthood (37). In addition, the vagus nerve, which plays an
important role in the transmission of immune information from
gut to brain as well as from brain to gut (38, 39), apparently also
plays an important role during development of the microbiota–
brain communication.
Given the bidirectional flow of regulatory signals between the
microbiota and the brain, it should come as little surprise that psychological stress leads to altered intestinal barrier function (40)
and host–microbiota interactions (41). Increasing values of

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

31

psychological stress also negatively affects the immune system
(42), as demonstrated by reduced antibody responses to vaccines
(43). There thus appears to be a close connection between the
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA)-axis, the autonomic nervous system, the gut, the kidneys, and the immune system, and this
connection is mediated via cortisol, neuronal transmitters, cytokines, and hormones (44).
The long-time observation—that infectious disease is too complex to be analyzed exclusively in terms of mechanistic interactions
between the immune system and the pathogen—has thus received
rich empirical support. Adaptive systems are relational all the way,
and to understand a given interaction, we have to understand a
whole lot more than the target system. To define immunocompetence singularly in terms of internal molecular and cellular properties of the immune system is, accordingly, misconceived. This way
of understanding immunocompetence provides a one-sided and
thus insufficient understanding. Immunocompetence should rather
be understood as a relational property that transcends the boundaries of the organism. To understand immunocompetence is thus
to understand how the individual’s immune system relates to the
other adaptive systems as well as to the organism’s Umwelt.
Accordingly, organisms may be immunocompetent despite harboring
deficient immune resources. And conversely, immunocompetence
may be reduced despite the presence of a well-functioning immune
system. It all comes down to how the relations develop.

6. The “Early
Origins” Scheme
The relevance of external inputs, in the form of infection or stress,
is in many ways dependent upon the internal wirings of the experiencing organism’s adaptive systems. And since these wirings are
laid down during the developmental process, it follows that development is of tremendous importance for the organism’s adaptability. The now obvious idea that development is an integral part of
evolutionary biology was, nevertheless, largely ignored by evolutionary biologists from about 1900 to about 1980 (45). The separation of the fields was so extensive that when Mayr (46) in an
influential paper discussed cause and effect in biology, he still distinguished between evolutionary and developmental biology as of
two separate explanatory fields that differed in methods, explanatory projects, and concepts.
During the making of the “modern synthesis” of evolution in
the 1930s, in which Darwin’s theory of natural selection was
blended with the rediscovered Mendelian genetics, evolution was
portrayed as an interplay between mutation and selection, with the
former providing a supply of variation and the latter acting as a
fitness-based sieve (45). In the case of unicellular organisms, this

32

E. Ulvestad

representation is fairly accurate. But in the case of multicellular
organisms, where genes serve as modulators of biochemical and
physiological parameters that in turn influence the growth of
embryonic tissues, the effects of mutation on fitness are not directly
accessible for selection. Since selection works on phenotypes and
their functional characteristics, since development is a major determinant on the multicellular organism’s phenotype, and since some
ontogenetic trajectories are better for reproducing and survival
than their competitors, development is important for the pathway
taken by natural selection.
Development impinges on evolution because it ties the organism up in a system of references to other living and non-living entities in-between fertilization and death. Hence, organismal life is
not simply conforming to a predetermined trajectory but follows a
variable path upon which developmental decisions are influential.
Genes, the “master modulators” of the modern synthesis, are thus
acting more as context sensitive difference makers than as determining factors; genes make regulatory factors, signaling molecules,
enzymes, and receptors that interact with each other in highly
regulated networks, and these are all strongly modulated by
epigenetic processes, including histone modification and DNAmethylation (47). Thus, identical twins with the same genetic
make-up may turn out quite different owing to epigenetic processes and developmental plasticity (48).
Epigenetic and developmental processes have been evolutionary selected because they adapt organisms to the environment.
But, as has been increasingly recognized, they have maladaptive
potential as well. This may occur if environmental signals, for
instance such that were required for the establishment of proper
DNA transcription or stable patterns of interaction between cells
of the adaptive systems, change in salient ways. The so-called
hygiene hypothesis, the best-reasoned theory for the epidemic-like
recent increase in allergy and autoimmunity, utilizes this explanatory framework. According to the hypothesis, humans of today
experience an absence of stimuli from microbes which are important for the functional development of the immune system. This
creates an input-deficiency syndrome, thus leading to malfunctional development of the regulatory cells of the immune system
(49, 50). Although little is known about why one kind of
inflammatory disease develops instead of another, or why it develops in one individual but not in another, compelling evidence indicate that the malfunctioning develops as a consequence of
perturbations to the long co-evolutionary relationships between
intestinal microbes and their vertebrate hosts (51).
Not only does the hygiene hypothesis tell a story of how the
microbial Umwelt affects the maturing immune system, it additionally tells the story of how human beings affect their microbial
Umwelt. Man, being an expert niche constructor (14), is capable

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

33

of changing his environment at an astonishing rate—for better and
worse. On the better side, epidemiological data from European
countries have taught us that human life expectancy was about 25
years until the mid eighteenth century (52). Up to that time the
leading cause of death was infectious diseases in childhood, and so
the increasing life expectancy primarily reflected progress in the
control of infectious disease; in the mid-nineteenth century by
means of hygiene, in the late-nineteenth century by vaccines, and
by antibiotics in the mid-twentieth century. The adaptations were
thus of cultural type rather than adjustments of immunity by natural selection.
The downside is that the constructed niche gives rise to a mismatch between man’s biologically derived response patterns and
environmental challenges. The westernization of society has, for
example, made food available in large quantities. And along with
better housing and health conditions, the struggle for daily survival has almost vanished. But this change has by no means ended
life’s struggles—man has instead become increasingly susceptible
to developmental aberrations and precipitation of various diseases,
including coronary heart disease, diabetes, hypertension, as well as
cognitive and psychological impairment (53, 54).

7. The Paradox
of Deterioration
As of today, individuals in low and middle income countries in
Africa have a life expectancy of 49 years, while people in high
income European countries may expect to live until they reach the
age of 80 years (55). It is still the young that die in Africa—46% of
all deaths in Africa are children aged under 15 years, whereas only
20% are 60 years or older. In contrast, only 1% of deaths in high
income countries are in children less than 15 years, whereas 84%
are aged 60 years and over. This uneven distribution of death is
matched by a similar uneven distribution of causes—while infectious disease is still the major cause of death in Africa, people in
Western societies die from cardiovascular disease and cancer.
Owing to the remarkable postponement of death that has
occurred during the last 100 years, folk increasingly develop degenerative diseases of the adaptive systems, including diabetes,
Alzheimer’s disease, and immunodeficiency—death rates for people over 65 years of age compared to people aged 25–44 are, for
example, 43-fold for cancer and 89-fold for pneumonia and
influenza (56). Aging people thus struggle with a loss of integrity,
in many ways a truly astonishing phenomenon since it suggests
that the adaptive systems, which produce and maintain themselves
during development, are unable to perform the seemingly much
simpler task of maintaining what is already formed. This paradox of

34

E. Ulvestad

deterioration is a real challenge for scientists that aim to predict
and control the psychoneuroimmunological systems. Unfortunately,
the paradox’ solution provides little theoretical support for the
achievement of therapeutic control.
As summarized by Mayr (46), there are two principled kinds of
cause in biology—proximate causes that give explanations in terms
of developmental and physiological mechanisms, and ultimate
causes which provide explanations in terms of evolutionary mechanisms. The two are connected by evolutionary time—the ultimate
causes shape the proximate causes. And since natural selection is a
progressive force, one would expect evolution to shape developmental systems to near optimal functioning. But, as elaborated by
Williams (57), natural selection works on genes that enhance
reproduction, not longevity. And the genes responsible for aging
may thus be kept in the gene pool by selection on their beneficial
effects to the young that possess them and not owing to their detrimental effects in senescence. This phenomenon, termed antagonistic pleiotropy, explains why the selective pressure on machinery
responsible for maintenance of genomic and cellular integrity in
aging tissues has been insignificant (58).
Since infectious disease has been a major threat to the survival
of young children and thus to their reproductive potential, natural
selection should be expected to shape the immune system so as to
increase its efficiency during the early years of life. And as evidenced
by observational data, production of inflammatory mediators by
the innate immune system complies well with the antagonistic
pleiotropic framework. The importance of a highly active innate
immune system has been corroborated by comparative data
between African and European populations. The data strongly
suggest that individuals of African ancestry have a more active
inflammatory response, perhaps owing to a greater burden of infectious disease (59). Furthermore, emerging evidence indicates that
pro-inflammatory genotypes are associated with a higher incidence
of inflammatory disease in later life, including atherosclerosis, diabetes, and cancer (60). The selection for a strong pro-inflammatory
immune response, which is necessary to resist otherwise fatal infections in early life, is thus—as predicted by Williams’ hypothesis—a
double edge sword; the overproduction of inflammatory molecules
may cause inflammatory diseases and even death later in life.
Natural selection thus gives rise to mechanisms that both create
and destroy the organism.
Surprising data from the last couple of years have even shown
that this overproduction may be enhanced by various cultural
“practices.” Early experiences, which can affect adult health either
by cumulative damage over time or by adversities that take place
during sensitive periods (61), can take dramatic and often unexpected courses. Experience of maltreatment in childhood is, for
example, a strong predictor of adult inflammation (62), and, more

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

35

specifically, increases the risk for autoimmune disease (63). To control
such malfunctions psychoneuroimmunologists thus have to treat
culture no less than biology.
Also the adaptive immune system follows the logic laid down by
Williams, but in a modified form. Newborn children come with
immature adaptive immune systems and thus have to rely on maternally derived IgG and IgA for their first 6 months of life. However,
this immunodeficiency of the young does not contradict Williams’
prediction. Adaptive systems are designed by natural selection to
mature over the life course and so their seeming failure in early life
is part of their developmental program. The same goes for their
deteriorating function with age, as evidenced by increasing tendencies to autoimmunity and immunodeficiencies, and as predicted by
the antagonistic pleiotropy framework. For the adaptive immune
system this malfunctioning is partly owing to a reconfiguration of T
cell immunity, manifesting as the accumulation of senescent and
dysfunctional cells (64), and a shift in subpopulation frequency as
well as expressed repertoire of antibodies and T cell receptors (65).

8. Summing Up
Compelling evidence has demonstrated that early environments
are important determinants of nervous, endocrine, and immune
functions over the life course. As adaptive systems seem inherently
disposed to degeneration, and since the prospects of controlling
such evolutionary selected disintegration seem dim, a major aim of
psychoneuroimmunological investigations should be to lay out
early conditions that serve to increase the integrative processes
and, of no less importance, to delay the disintegrative processes.
Such investigations should acknowledge the importance of the
experiential dimension, and should take a life cycle perspective in
which the organism’s timely unfolding is correlated to salient environmental contingencies. To develop, the organism needs to
extract resources from the environment, and variation in the organism’s local ecology will thus in large part determine the levels of
available resources and thus the developmental course.
References
1. Ader R (1981) Psychoneuroimmunology.
Academic, New York
2. Good RA (1981) Foreword: interactions of the
body’s major networks. In: Ader R (ed)
Psychoneuroimmunology. Academic, New
York, pp xvii–xix
3. Plaut SM, Friedman SB (1981) Psychosocial
factors in infectious disease. In: Ader R (ed)

Psychoneuroimmunology. Academic, New
York., pp 3–30
4. Wittgenstein L (1960) The blue and brown
books. Harper & Row, New York
5. Biondi M, Picardi A (1999) Psychological stress
and neuroendocrine function in humans: the
last two decades of research. Psychother
Psychosom 68:114–150

36

E. Ulvestad

6. Kull K (2001) Jakob von Uexküll: an introduction.
Semiotica 134:1–59
7. Uexküll J (1982) The theory of meaning (original 1940). Semiotica 42:25–82
8. Ulvestad E (2007) Defending life. The nature
of host-parasite relations. Springer, Dordrecht
9. Hoffmeyer J (2008) Biosemiotics. An examination into the signs of life and the life of signs.
University of Scranton Press, Scranton
10. Hill K, Kaplan H (1999) Life history traits in
humans: theory and empiricial studies. Annu
Rev Anthropol 28:397–430
11. Craig AD (2009) How do you feel – now? The
anterior insula and human awareness. Nat Rev
Neurosci 10:59–70
12. Craig AD (2004) Human feelings: why are
some more aware than others? Trends Cogn
Sci 8:239–241
13. Frith C (2008) Making up the mind. How the
brain creates our mental world. Blackwell,
Oxford
14. Odling-Smee FJ, Laland KN, Feldman MW
(2003) Niche construction. The neglected
process in evolution. Princeton University
Press, Princeton
15. Sterelny K (2007) Social intelligence, human
intelligence and niche construction. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 362:719–730
16. Laland KN, Odling-Smee J, Myles S (2010)
How culture shaped the human genome: bringing genetics and the human sciences together.
Nat Rev Genet 11:137–148
17. Beauregard M (2007) Mind does really matter:
evidence from neuroimaging studies of emotional self-regulation, psychotherapy, and placebo effect. Prog Neurobiol 81:218–236
18. Getz L, Kirkengen AL, Ulvestad E (2011) The
human biology – saturated with experience. J
Nor Med Assoc 131:683–687
19. Henrich J, Heine SJ, Norenzayan A (2010)
The weirdest people in the world? Behav Brain
Sci 33:61–83
20. Gallagher S, Zahavi D (2008) The phenomenological mind. An introduction to philosophy
of mind and cognitive science. Routledge,
London
21. International human genome consortium
(2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409:860–921
22. Kurth R, Bannert N (2010) Beneficial and detrimental effects of human endogenous retroviruses. Int J Cancer 126:306–314
23. Venner S, Feschotte C, Biémont C (2009)
Dynamics of transposable elements: towards a
community ecology of the genome. Trends
Genet 25:317–323

24. Zhang Q, Raoof M, Chen Y et al (2010)
Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs cause
inflammatory responses to injury. Nature 464:
104–107
25. Sholtis SJ, Noonan JP (2010) Gene regulation
and the origins of human biological uniqueness. Trends Genet 26:110–118
26. Dethlefsen L, McFall-Ngai M, Relman DA
(2007) An ecological and evolutionary perspective on human-microbe mutualism and
disease. Nature 449:811–818
27. Pennisi E (2011) Going viral: exploring the
role of viruses in our bodies. Science 331:1513
28. Spor A, Koren O, Ley R (2011) Unravelling
the effects of the environment and host genotype on the gut microbiome. Nat Rev Microbiol
9:279–290
29. Turnbaugh PJ, Hamady M, Yatsunenko T et al
(2009) A core gut microbiome in obese and
lean twins. Nature 457:480–484
30. Reyes A, Haynes M, Hanson N et al (2010)
Viruses in the faecal microbiota of monozygotic twins and their mothers. Nature
466:334–338
31. Gonzalez A, Clemente JC, Shade A et al (2011)
Our microbial selves: what ecology can teach
us. EMBO Rep 12:775–784
32. Nicholson JK, Holmes E, Wilson ID (2005)
Gut microorganisms, mammalian metabolism
and personalized health care. Nat Rev Microbiol
3:431–438
33. Musso G, Gambino R, Cassader M (2011)
Interactions between gut microbiota and host
metabolism predisposing to obesity and diabetes. Annu Rev Med 62:361–380
34. Ivanov II, Littman DR (2011) Modulation of
immune homeostasis by commensal bacteria.
Curr Opin Microbiol 14:106–114
35. Lee YK, Mazmanian SK (2010) Has the microbiota played a critical role in the evolution of
the adaptive immune system? Science
330:1768–1773
36. Heijtz RD, Wang S, Anuar F et al (2011)
Normal gut microbiota modulates brain development and behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 108:3047–3052
37. Boulanger LM (2009) Immune proteins in
brain development and synaptic plasticity.
Neuron 64:93–109
38. Van Der Zanden EP, Boeckxstaens GE, de
Jonge WJ (2009) The vagus nerve as a modulator
of intestinal inflammation. Neurogastroenterol
Motil 21:6–17
39. Tracey KJ (2010) Understanding immunity
requires more than immunology. Nat Immunol
1:561–564

2

Psychoneuroimmunology: The Experiential Dimension

40. Gareau MG, Silva MA, Perdue MH (2008)
Pathophysiological mechanisms of stressinduced intestinal damage. Curr Mol Med 8:
274–281
41. Söderholm JD, Yang PC, Ceponis P et al
(2002) Chronic stress induces mast cell-dependent bacterial adherence and initiates mucosal
inflammation in rat intestine. Gastroenterology
123:1099–1108
42. Padgett DA, Glaser R (2003) How stress
influences the immune response. Trends
Immunol 24:444–448
43. Li J, Cowden LG, King JD et al (2007) Effects
of chronic stress and interleukin-10 gene polymorphisms on antibody response to tetanus
vaccine in family caregivers of patients with
Alzheimer’s disease. Psychosom Med 69:
551–559
44. McEwen BS, Gianaros PJ (2011) Stress- and
allostasis-induced brain plasticity. Annu Rev
Med 62:431–445
45. Hamburger V (1980) Embryology and the
modern synthesis in evolutionary theory. In:
Mayr E, Provine WB (eds) The evolutionary
synthesis. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
pp 96–112
46. Mayr E (1961) Cause and effect in biology.
Science 134:1501–1506
47. Reik W (2007) Stability and flexibility of epigenetic gene regulation in mammalian development. Nature 447:425–432
48. Fraga MF, Ballestar E, Paz MF et al (2005)
Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime
of monozygotic twins. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 102:10604–10609
49. Rook GA (2010) 99th Dahlem conference on
infection,
inflammation
and
chronic
inflammatory disorders: Darwinian medicine
and the ‘hygiene’ or ‘old friends’ hypothesis.
Clin Exp Immunol 160:70–79
50. Okada H, Kuhn C, Feillet H et al (2010) The
‘hygiene hypothesis’ for autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. Clin Exp Immunol
160:1–9
51. Fitzsimmons CM, Dunne DW (2009) Survival
of the fittest: allergology or parasitology?
Trends Parasitol 25:447–451

37

52. Cairns J (1997) Matters of life and death.
Perspectives on public health, molecular biology, cancer and the prospects for the human
race. Princeton University Press, Princeton
53. Gluckman P, Hanson M (2005) The fetal
matrix: evolution, development and disease.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
54. Osmond C, Barker DJ (2000) Fetal, infant,
and childhood growth are predictors of coronary heart disease, diabetes, and hypertension
in adult men and women. Environ Health
Perspect 108(suppl 3):545–553
55. World Health Organization (2008) The global
burden of disease 2004 update. WHO Press,
Geneva
56. Troen BR (2003) The biology of aging. Mt
Sinai J Med 70:3–22
57. Williams GC (1957) Pleiotropy, natural selection, and the evolution of senescence. Evolution
11:398–411
58. De S (2011) Somatic mosaicism in healthy
human tissues. Trends Genet 27:217–223
59. Pennington R, Gatenbee C, Kennedy B et al
(2009) Group differences in proneness to
inflammation. Infect Genet Evol 9:1371–1380
60. Licastro F, Candore G, Lio D et al (2005)
Innate immunity and inflammation in ageing: a
key for understanding age-related diseases.
Immun Ageing 2:8
61. Shonkoff JP, Boyce WT, McEwen BS (2009)
Neuroscience, molecular biology, and the
childhood roots of health disparities: building a
new framework for health promotion and disease prevention. JAMA 301:2252–2259
62. Danese A, Pariante CM, Caspi A et al (2007)
Childhood maltreatment predicts adult
inflammation in a life-course study. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 104:1319–1324
63. Dube SR, Fairweather D, Pearson WS et al
(2009) Cumulative childhood stress and autoimmune diseases in adults. Psychosom Med 71:
243–250
64. Pawelec G, Akbar A, Caruso C et al (2004)
Is immunosenescence infectious? Trends
Immunol 25:406–410
65. Miller RA (1996) The aging immune system:
primer and prospectus. Science 273:70–74

Chapter 3
Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic
Review
Akinori Nakata
Abstract
The purpose of this review was to provide current knowledge about the possible association between
psychosocial job stress and immune parameters in blood, saliva, and urine. Using bibliographic databases
(PubMed, PsychINFO, Web of Science, Medline) and the snowball method, 56 studies were found.
In general, exposure to psychosocial job stress (high job demands, low job control, high job strain, job
dissatisfaction, high effort–reward imbalance, overcommitment, burnout, unemployment, organizational
downsizing, economic recession) had a measurable impact on immune parameters (reduced NK cell activity,
NK and T cell subsets, CD4+/CD8+ ratio, and increased inflammatory markers). The evidence supports
that psychosocial job stresses are related to disrupted immune responses but further research is needed to
demonstrate cause–effect relationships.
Key words: Psychosocial job stress, Immune system, Psychoneuroimmunology, Systematic review,
Work environment

1. Background
A poor psychosocial work environment has been linked with a
broad array of adverse health outcomes. Studies have demonstrated
that prolonged exposure to psychosocial job stress increases the risk
for coronary heart disease (1–3), hypertension (4), immune-related
disorders (5), musculoskeletal disorders (6), depression (7, 8), poor
mental health (9), and stress-related disorders (10), as well as adverse
health behaviors such as alcohol dependence, substance misuse, physical inactivity, poor sleep, and obesity (11–14). To elucidate the
mechanisms responsible for these effects, researchers have explored
the relationship between psychosocial job stress and the immune
system, the body’s chief defense against numerous diseases.

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_3, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

39

40

A. Nakata

Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) studies have shown that
exposure to psychological stress is associated with a variety of
immune indicators (15, 16). Stress is known to activate the
sympathetic nervous system leading to changes in peripheral
adrenaline and noradrenaline secretions, while a variety of
endocrine factors such as cortisol, prolactin, and growth hormone are altered through the hypothalamic-pituitary function.
The immune system receives signals from the central nervous
system and endocrine system to respond and adapt to the stimuli, i.e., stress. If stress is manageable, it may promote adaptation. However, if stress is persistent and difficult to manage, it
can lead over time to wear and tear on the body and brain,
consequently causing multiple physiological dysfunctions, i.e.,
allostatic load (17). Psychosocial job stresses are often related to
the latter, which may lead to irreversible or incurable health
conditions if stress cannot be managed (18, 19).
This chapter contains a systematic literature review specifically
focused on psychosocial job stress and the immune response. First,
the types of psychosocial job stressors studied in this area are listed.
Second, the immunological indicators generally selected for studies of the relationship between psychosocial job stress and immunity and the primary functions and roles of these parameters are
explained. Third, evidence will be provided about how psychosocial job stress may alter immune responses.

2. Method
A systematic review of all English articles using PubMed, PsychINFO,
Web of Science, and Medline was conducted to identify all observational studies assessing the association between psychosocial job
stress and the immune system. References from relevant reviews and
articles (“snowball method”) were also scrutinized. The search terms
included: job stress, occupational stress, work stress, job strain, job control,
job demands, workload, job satisfaction, effort–reward imbalance, overcommitment, unemployment, burnout, overwork, social support at
work, supervisor support, and coworker support in combination with
the selected immunological markers: lymphocyte, natural killer (NK)
cell, helper T cell, cytotoxic T cell, CD4, CD3, CD8, CD25, CD27,
CD28, CD29, CD45RA, CD45RO, immunoglobulin (Ig), IgA, IgG,
IgM, IgD, IgE, cytokine, interleukin, inflammation, C-reactive protein
(CRP), complement component as well as more general immunological
terms: immune system, immune function, and immunity. Studies were
included in our review if they were studies of workers and had immunological outcomes using blood, saliva, or urine. Overall, 56 studies
were identified for the period ending August 2011 and the sample
sizes of these studies ranged from 25 to 1,563.

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

41

3. Results
A list of psychosocial job stress measures frequently used in PNI
research is presented in Table 1. As shown in this table, a number of
subjective and objective measures have been used to define job stress.
Some measures derive from theory-based models and measure subjective feelings about the job. Job stress may be also be defined
objectively by work environment changes such as unemployment,
organizational downsizing, and economic recession. Most studies
are based on subjective feelings (how employees perceive job stress)
as a measure of stress.
Table 2 shows the examples of immune (-related) indicators
frequently investigated in job stress research. As shown in this
table, functional and quantitative aspects of immune markers are
measured. NK cell activity (NKCA) and lymphocyte transformation tests are typical functional parameters while measurement of
lymphocyte subsets, immunoglobulins, and cytokine concentrations are classified as quantitative parameters.
Tables 3, 4, and 5 as well as Tables 6, 7, and 8 present the
summary of the studies reviewed. Tables 3, 4, and 5 present the
possible associations between psychosocial job stressors and cellular
immune markers while Tables 6, 7, and 8 summarize the relationships
between psychosocial job stressors, humoral immune markers, and
cytokine concentrations. If a study found a statistically significant
relationship, the association was indicated in Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
and 8 as a positive (↑) or negative (↓) association. If the study
measured immune parameters but found no significant associations,
it was stated as non-significant (NS). There were 46 cross-sectional
and 10 prospective studies of which 49 studies used blood, six used
saliva, and one used urine samples. There were 27 studies from
Europe (Norway, Sweden, Finland, Netherland, Germany,
Switzerland, Belgium, Italy, and UK), 19 studies from Asia (Japan,
Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, and China), four studies from the
Middle East (Israel), three studies from Oceania (Australia and
New Zealand), and three studies from the US.

4. Discussion
4.1. Job Strain
and Immunity

The job demands-control (JDC) model (hereafter referred to as
the job strain model) is one of the most influential job stress models in occupational stress research. Because it is spare, practical, and
testable, it has been widely adopted in occupational health studies.
According to Karasek, a limited number of job-related psychosocial risk factors (job control/decision latitude and job demands)
can be combined in a simple theoretical framework (job strain)

42

A. Nakata

Table 1
List of psychosocial job stress measures frequently used in
job stress research
Type of job stresses
Subjective
stress measures

Job demands (job strain model)
Job control (job strain model)
Job strain (job demands/job control)
Effort (effort–reward imbalance model)
Reward (effort–reward imbalance model)
Overcommitment (effort–reward imbalance model)
Social support at work (job strain model)
Supervisor support (job strain model)
Coworker support (job strain model)
Workload (NIOSH generic job stress model, etc.)
Variance in workload (NIOSH generic job stress model)
Job dissatisfaction
Role conflict (NIOSH generic job stress model)
Role ambiguity (NIOSH generic job stress model)
Mental/cognitive demands (NIOSH generic job stress
model)
Interpersonal conflict
Skill underutilization (NIOSH generic job stress model)
Burnout (Maslach, Shirom)

Objective
stress measures

Unemployment
Job insecurity
Organizational downsizing/restructuring
Economic recession
Overtime/overwork

that can be an important determinant of worker health (20). Job
control refers to employees’ control over their tasks and how those
tasks are executed, while job demands are psychological stressors
(e.g., time pressure, conflicting demands, reaction time required,
work amount, degree of concentration required, etc.) in the work
environment. The job strain model postulates that job stress
becomes highest when job demands are high and job control is
low. A number of studies have demonstrated that job strain predicts
coronary heart disease (3), stroke (21), type 2 diabetes (22),
musculoskeletal pain (23), depression (7), sickness absence (24),
and poor psychological well-being (25).
The job strain model is the most prevalent model used in studies
of the psychosocial work environment and immunity and there are
12 studies reported to date (19, 26–36). One of the first studies
that examined this relationship was from Sweden. In a sample of
49 workers with different occupations (air traffic controllers, waiters,
physicians, etc.), Theorell et al. (1990) examined how job strain
and workplace social support affected serum IgG levels and found

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

43

Table 2
Examples of immune (-related) indicators frequently used in job stress research
Indicators
Functional parameters
Natural killer cell activity
(NKCA)

Lymphocyte transformation
test (mitogen stimulation)

CD4+/CD8+ ratio

Quantitative parameters
Natural killer (NK) cells
B cells

T cells

Cytotoxic T cells (CD8+)

Helper T cells (CD4+)

Memory T cells (CD4+
CD45RO+)

Naive T cells
(CD4+ CD45RA+)

Major roles/functions
NK cells are large granular cells possessing killer activity against
certain tumor cells and virus-infected cells without prior sensitization. Reduced NKCA often indicates poor resistance to tumor cells
and virus infected cells, leading to a higher cancer incidence and
infection
A functional test of the ability of lymphocytes to respond to chemical
substances called mitogens that encourage a cell to commence cell
division triggering mitosis. There are several commonly used
mitogens, i.e., phytohemagglutinin A (PHA), concanavalin A
(ConA), and pokeweed mitogen (PWM); PPD (tuberculin),
Candida antigen, and streptokinase-streptodornase. Lower value
often indicates poor response to pathogens/antigens and reduced
cellular immune function
An indicator for the status of the cellular immune system. The value
depends on a balance of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. The normal
(non-clinical) range is between 0.60 and 220. Lower values are
often found in HIV-infected patients and those with compromised
immune system
Kill certain tumor and virus-infected cells. Lower counts may reflect
poor resistance to tumor cells and virus-infected cells
Antibody (immunoglobulin, gammaglobulin) production. An
extreme decrease of B cells is considered to be associated with
suppression in production of immunoglobulins
Directly attack foreign antigens and regulate the immune system. An
excessive increase of T cells is known to be associated with systemic
inflammation, whereas a persistent decrease of T cells is related to
immunodeficiency and psychological disorders such as depression
Lysis of virus-infected cells, tumor cells, or allografted cells. Lower
counts may reflect poor resistance to virus-infected cells and tumor
cells
Facilitate B cell proliferation and differentiation, immunoglobulin
synthesis, assist cytotoxic T cells attacking antigens. An excessive
increase in counts is associated with inflammation while a decrease
of counts is found in HIV-infected patients
Subset of helper T cells that respond to previously encountered
antigens. This cell can reproduce to mount a faster and stronger
immune response than the first time the immune system responded
to the antigens. Higher counts indicate inflammation while lower
counts are often found in people exposed to hazardous chemical
factors
Subset of helper T cells that have not yet encountered antigens. This
cell responds to the newly encountered antigens and will turn into a
reservoir of memory T cells

(continued)

44

A. Nakata

Table 2
(continued)
Indicators

Major roles/functions

Immunoglobulin
G, A, M (IgG, IgA, IgM)

Neutralize bacteria, viruses, and other environmental pathogens.
Higher values may indicate primary infection or reactivation/
reinfection to antigens
Proinflammatory cytokine primarily secreted by monocytes and
macrophages. It stimulates B cells to produce antibody, NK cells to
destroy foreign cells, resting T cells to produce more cytokines,
and central nervous system to exert sickness behavior
Stimulates proliferation and differentiation of B cells into antibodysecreting cells
IL-6 is the major initiator of acute phase response by hepatocytes and
a primary determinant of hepatic CRP production. It has both
pro- and anti-inflammatory actions
Anti-inflammatory cytokine produced by T cells and inhibits the
synthesis of IL-1 by macrophages and down-regulates expression
of major histocompatibility antigens
IFN-γ is primarily secreted by NK cells and T cells and has an ability
to inhibit viral replication
There are two types of tumor necrosis factors: TNF-α and TNF-β.
TNF-β is cytotoxic against some tumors that can cause lysis and
destruction of the cells. TNF-α stimulates the production of IL-6
S-IgA is one of the antibodies that form a front line of defense in
mucosal immunity and it is thought to be indicative of the
functional status of the entire mucosal immune system. S-IgA
deficiency represents a reduced level of protection for the body,
and an increased risk of infection
CRP is produced by the liver and the level of CRP rises when there is
inflammation throughout the body. CRP rises up to 50,000-fold in
acute inflammation, such as viral and bacterial infections. It has also
been used as a very rough proxy for cardiovascular disease risk

Interleukin (IL)-1

Interleukin (IL)-4
Interleukin (IL)-6

Interleukin (IL)-10
Interferon (IFN)-γ
Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-α and -β
Salivary IgA (s-IgA)

C-reactive protein (CRP)

that job strain was associated with an increase of serum IgG level
but workplace social support attenuated its effect when job strain
was at peak (33). This research group also examined the relationship
between job strain and IgG and IgA in human service organizations,
but failed to find significant associations between job strain and
IgG or IgA (30). Studies from Japan and the Netherlands reported
the relationship between job strain and lymphocyte subset counts
(26–29). Among shift workers in the Netherlands, high job
demands and high job control were related to decreases of CD4+
T cells and CD4+/CD8+ ratio (27). Three studies from Japan
consistently reported that job strain was inversely related to counts
of NK cells and CD4+ T cell subsets (26, 28, 29). More recent
studies have focused on the relationship of job strain with
inflammatory markers such as CRP, interleukin (IL)-6, tumor

1987

Sweden

Sweden

Norway

New Zealand 1994

Netherlands

Japan

Japan

Arnetz

Arnetz

Endresen

Marriot

Meijman

Nakano

Nakamura

1999

1998

1995

1991

1991

Year

First author Country

42M/−

45 (56) M/−

24M/−

45

–/94W

78M/246W

−/25W

Sample (M/F)

CS

CS, CC

CS

CS

CS

L

L

Study
design

Office workers

Taxi drivers vs.
age-matched
controls

Cargo handlers
(shift workers)

Meat factory workers

Bank
employees

Blue-collar
workers

Unemployed

Occupation

Burnout syndrome:
Low personal
accomplishments
(LPA), high depresonalization (HD),
high emotional
exhaustion (HEE)

Severe economic
recession

High job demands

Unemployment stress

Job stress
(communication,
leadership,
relocation, and
workload)

Unemployment stress

Unemployment stress

Exposure

↓

NKCA

Table 3
Association between psychosocial job stressors and cellular immune markers (functional markers)

(continued)

A, Sm, Al, BMI

A

NM/NC

↓
↓

NM/NC

NM/NC

NM/NC

↓
NS

NM/NC

↓

LAA LTT Confounders

↓

NS

CD4+/
CD8+

1999

Israel

Japan

Italy

USA

Japan

Japan

Italy

Lerman

Morikawa

Di Donato

Cohen

Kawaguchi

Okamoto

Boscolo

2009

2008

2007

2007

2006

2005

Year

First author Country

Table 3
(continued)

88M/−

59M/15W

−/128W

96M/104W

40M/44W

−/61W

68M/111W

Sample (M/F)

CS

CS

CS

L

CS

CS

CS

Study
design
Exposure

High quantitative
workload
High conflict with
physicians

University
employees

Emergency
physicians

Nurses

Unemployed

High workload
High job insecurity

Overwork (long
work hours)

High quantitative
workload
High variance in
workload

Unemployment stress
(4 months)

University and
Occupational stress
museum employees

Nurses

Burnout syndrome:
Mixed population
High total burnout
(69 postg raduate
(HTB), high
students, 48 laboraemotional
tory technicians, 46
exhaustion (HEE),
research
high chronic fatigue
associates, 16
(HCF), high
other
cognitive weariness
occupations)
(HCW)

Occupation

NM/NC
A, S, R, Ed,
Sm, Med
A, WkEx,
WkSch, Sm

NM/NC
A, Sm, Al

↓
↓
↓

↓
↓

S, A, Edu

LAA LTT Confounders

A

CD4+/
CD8+

↓

NKCA

2009

Germany

Japan

Korea

Japan

Japan

Bosch

Nakata

Lee

Nakata

Nakata

190M/157W

165M/141W

−/38W

165M/141W

478M/59W

Sample (M/F)

CS

CS

L

CS

CS

Study
design

White-collar workers
(trading and
pharmaceutical
companies)

White-collar workers
(trading and
pharmaceutical
companies)

Nurses

White-collar workers
(trading and
pharmaceutical
companies)

Factory workers

Occupation

A, Sm
S, A, Al, Ex,
Edu, Sl,
BMI, Med,
Dp, Conf,
Com,
Occup,
Jobsat
A, Sm, Al, Ex,
Edu, Sl,
BMI, Med,
Dp, Conf,
Com,
Occup, Caf

NS

↓

Overtime (hours
of overtime
per month)

High effort
Low reward
High ERI
High overcommitment

Low job satisfaction

NS

A, S, Ms, Ed,
Sm, Ex, Al,
BMI, PC,
Dp

LAA LTT Confounders

High objective stress
High subjective stress

↓

CD4+/
CD8+

A, Sm, Al, Ex,
Edu, Sl,
BMI, Med,
Dep, Conf

NKCA

↓

High effort
Low reward
High ERI
High overcommitment
Low job control
High job demands

Exposure

M men; F women; CS cross-sectional; CC case–control; L longitudinal; ERI effort reward imbalance; NKCA natural killer cell activity; LTT lymphocyte transformation test; LAA leukocyte
adhesiveness/aggregation test; A age; S sex; R race; Ed educational level; Ms marital status; Sm smoking; Al alcohol consumption; Ex physical exercise; Sl sleep, Anx anxiety; BMI body mass
index; Med medication usage; Conf interpersonal conflict at work; BL blood lead concentration; HRT hormone replacement therapy; WkEx work experience; WkSch work schedule; PC physical
condition; Occup occupation; Caf caffeine intake; Com commuting time; Jobsat job satisfaction; IC income, NM/NC not mentioned or not controlled for
↓= decrease; ↑ = increase; NS = no significant change

2011

2011

2010

2010

Year

First author Country

Country

Norway

New
Zealand

Japan

Japan

Belgium

Japan

Italy

First
author

Endresen

Marriot

Kawakami

Nakamura

De Gucht

Nakata

Bargellini

2000

2000

1999

1999

1997

1994

1991

Year

39M/32W

116M/−

17M/43W

42M/−

76M/−

45

−/94W

Sample
(M/F)

CS

CS

CS

CS

CS

CS

CS

Study
design

Physicians

White-collar workers
(power plant
operators)

Nurses

Office workers

Blue-collar workers
(chemical
company)

Meat factory
workers

Bank employees

Occupation

Burnout: Low personal
accomplishments
(LPA), high
depresonalization
(HD), high emotional
exhaustion (HEE)

High job strain
Low social support
at work

High nursing stress

Burnout syndrome: Low
personal accomplishments (LPA), high
depresona-lization
(HD), high emotional
exhaustion (HEE)

Low job control
High job strain

Unemployment stress

Job stress
(communication,
leadership, relocation,
and workload)

Exposure

↓

NS

NS

NS

T cells

Table 4
Association between psychosocial job stressors and cellular immune markers (NK, T and, B cells)

S, Sm, Occup,
WkEx

A, Sm

↓

A, Sm, Al, BMI

A, Sm, BL

NM/NC

NM/NC

NS

NM/NC

Confounders

NS

↓

NS

NK cells B cells

Country

Japan

Japan

Japan

Japan

Japan

Netherlands

Japan

Japan

Italy

Korea

First
author

Nakata

Miyazaki

Sakami

Morikawa

Miyazaki

Mommersteeg

Okamoto

Nakata

Amati

Lee

2010

2010

2010

2008

2006

2005

2005

2004

2003

2002

Year

−/38W

26M/75W

165M/141W

59M/15W

49 Cases/38
controls

44M/50W

241M
(142M)/−

−/61W

71M/−

98M/−

231M/−

Sample
(M/F)

L

L

CS

CS

CC

CS

CS

CS

CS

CS

Study
design

Nurses

Nurses

White-collar workers
(trading and
pharmaceutical
companies)

Emergency
physicians

Participants
recruited via
websites

White-collar workers
(manufacturing
company)

Nurses

Non-smoking
firefighters

Private company

White-collar
workers (power
plant operators)

Occupation

High subjective stress

NS

NS

A, Sm
(continued)

NM/NC
NS

↑
High objective stress

Low job satisfaction

A, Sm, Al, Ex,
Edu, Sl, BMI,
Med, Dep,
Conf

↓

S, A, BMI
matched
(Med excluded)

Low job satisfaction

NS

NS

A, Al, Sm, Ex

A

A

A, Sm

A, Sm, Al, Ex

Confounders

NM/NC

NS

NS

NS

↓

NK cells B cells

NS

NS

NS

NS

NS

T cells

Overwork (long work
hours)

Burnout

High job demands
combined with low
social support at work

High conflict with
physicians

High quantitative
workload

High quantitative
workload

Low social support

Low job control

Exposure

Germany

Japan

Japan

Bellingrath

Nakata

Nakata

2011

2011

2010

Year

190M/157W

165M/141W

21M/34W

Sample
(M/F)

CS

CS

CS

Study
design

White-collar workers
(trading and
pharmaceutical
companies)

White-collar workers
(trading and
pharmaceutical
companies)

School teachers

Occupation

NS

High effort
Low reward
High ERI
imbalance
High overcommitment

NS

T cells

Overtime (hours
of overtime
per month)

High ERI
High over-commitment

Exposure

NS

NS

↓

↓

NK cells B cells

A, Sm, Al, Ex,
Edu, Sl, BMI,
Med, Dp,
Conf, Com,
Occup, Caf

S, A, Al, Ex, Edu,
Sl, BMI, Med,
Dp, Conf,
Com, Occup,
Jobsat

A, Med, Dep, Sm

Confounders

M men; F women; CS cross-sectional; CC case–control; L longitudinal; ERI effort reward imbalance; NKCA natural killer cell activity; LTT lymphocyte transformation test; LAA leukocyte
adhesiveness/aggregation test; A age; S sex; R race; Ed educational level; Ms marital status; Sm smoking; Al alcohol consumption; Ex physical exercise; Sl sleep; Anx anxiety; BMI body mass
index; Med medication usage; Conf interpersonal conflict at work; BL blood lead concentration; HRT hormone replacement therapy; WkEx work experience; WkSch work schedule; PC physical
condition; Occup occupation; Caf caffeine intake; Com commuting time; Jobsat job satisfaction; IC income; NM/NC not mentioned or not controlled for
↓ = decrease; ↑ = increase; NS = no significant change

Country

First
author

Table 4
(continued)

Japan

Belgium 1999

Japan

Japan

Germany 2009

Kawakami

De Gucht

Nakata

Nakata

Bosch

CS

CS

478M/
59W

CS

231M/− CS

High job strain
Low social support
at work

High nursing
stress

Low job control
High job strain

Exposure

Factory workers

High effort
Low reward
High ERI
imbalance
High overcommi
tment
Low job control
High job demands

White-collar
Low job control
workers (power
plant operators)

White-collar
workers
(power plant
operators)

Nurses

Blue-collar
workers
(chemical
company)

Study
design Occupation

116M/− CS

17M/
43W

76M/−

Sample
(M/F)

↓

↓

↓

NS

↑

NS

↑

↑

A, S, Ms, Ed,
Sm, Ex, Al,
BMI, PC,
Dp

A, Sm, Al, Ex

A, Sm

NM/NC

A, Sm, BL

Naïve Memory CD3+ CD4+ CD27+ CD27+ CD27CD4+ T CD4+ T CD25+ CD25+ CD28+ CD28- CD28cells
cells
cells cells cells
cells cells Confounders

M men; F women; CS cross-sectional; CC case–control, L longitudinal; ERI effort reward imbalance; NKCA natural killer cell activity; LTT lymphocyte transformation test; LAA leukocyte
adhesiveness/aggregation test; A age; S sex; R race; Ed educational level; Ms marital status; Sm smoking; Al alcohol consumption; Ex physical exercise; Sl sleep; Anx anxiety; BMI body mass
index; Med medication usage; Conf interpersonal conflict at work; BL blood lead concentration; HRT hormone replacement therapy; WkEx work experience; WkSch work schedule; PC physical
condition; Occup occupation; Caf caffeine intake; Com commuting time; Jobsat job satisfaction; IC income; NM/NC not mentioned or not controlled for
↓ = decrease, ↑ = increase, NS = no significant change

2002

2000

1997

Country Year

First
author

Table 5
Association between psychosocial job stressors and cellular immune markers (CD4, CD25, CD27, and CD28 subsets)

Norway

Sweden

Norway

Endresen

Theorell

Endresen

Singapore

Japan

Ng

Nakata

2000 116M/−

1999 −/124W

Switzerland 1996 158M/−

1992 −/40W

1991 −/94W

1990 39M/10W

Zeier

Henningsen USA

1984 38M/40W

Norway

Ursin

1987 −/34W

Year

First author Country

Sample
(M/F)

CS

CS

CS

L

CS

CS

CS

CS

White-collar workers
(power plant
operators)

Nurses

Air traffic controllers

Nurses

Bank employees

Various occupations
(air traffic controllers, waiters,
physicians, etc.)

Nurses

School teachers (W)
Merchant navy
students (M)

Study
design Occupation

↑

Job strain

High job strain

High general
stress

High work
demands

Occupational
stress

↑

NS
Job stress
(communication, leadership, relocation,
and workload)

NS

NS

↑

NS

NS

↑

↓

NS

NS

↓

NM/NC

NM/NC

NS A, S, WkEx

NM/NC
NM/NC

↑
↓

A, Sm

NM/NC

↑

NS NS NM/NC

↑

↓

Antibody
IgG IgM IgA s-IgA titers
C3 C4 Confounders

High psychological job stress
Low job
satisfaction

High job stress

Exposure

Table 6
Association between psychosocial job stressors and immunoglobulins and complement components

Singapore

Sweden

Belgium

Australia

Malaysia

Yang

Herttig

Clays

Wright

Masilaman

CS

CS

L

CS

CS

Downsizing
Reorganization

High professional
stress

High job strain

Exposure

High job strain
Low social
support

↓

NS

NS

NM/NC

↓

A, Edu,
Occup,
Sm, BMI,
Al, Med

A

CV
CPHP-

NM/NC

Ms, WkEx

↓

↓

A, S, Ms,
Ed, Sm, Al

Antibody
IgG IgM IgA s-IgA titers
C3 C4 Confounders

M men; F women; CS cross-sectional; CC case–control; L longitudinal; C3 complement component 3; C4 complement component 4; IL interleukin; IFN interferon; TNF tumor necrosis
factor; TGF transforming growth factor; CRP C-reactive protein; hs high sensitive; ERI effort reward imbalance; A age; S sex; R race; Ed educational level; Ms marital status; Sm smoking;
Al alcohol consumption; Ex physical exercise; Sl sleep; Anx anxiety; BMI body mass index; Med medication usage; Conf interpersonal conflict at work; BL blood lead concentration; HRT
hormone replacement therapy; WkEx work experience; WkSch work schedule; PC physical condition; Occup occupation; Caf caffeine intake; Com commuting time; Jobsat job satisfaction;
IC income; CV cytomegalovirus; CP Chlamydia pneumoniae; HP Helicobactor pylori; NM/NC not mentioned or not controlled for
↓ = decrease, ↑ = increase, NS = no significant change

Teachers

Low social
Various occupations
support
(private companies,
public administration, bank, insurance
companies,
hospitals)
Disability workers
Effort, ERI
Overcommitment

Nurses/medical
secretaries

Nurses

Human service
organizations

Study
design Occupation

2011 52M/240W CS

2011 43M/55W

2005 892M/−

2002 −/31W

2002 −/132W

2001 8M/95W

Sweden

Ohlson

Sample
(M/F)

Year

First author Country

Japan

Belgium

Sweden

UK

Japan

Japan

Nakano

De Gucht

Theroell

Hemingway

Sakami

Miyazaki

Fukuda

Japan

CS

CS

2008 −/118W

49 Cases/38
controls
CS

CC

2006 241M(142M)/− CS

2004 71M/−

2003 168M/115W CS

2000 102M/141W CC

1999 17M/43W

Occupation

High nursing stress

Severe economic
recession

Exposure

Nurses

Participants
recruited via
websites

White-collar
workers
(manufacturing company)

Non-smoking
firefighters

Civil servants

High nursing stress

Burnout

↑

↑

A

S, A, BMI
matched (Med
excluded)

A, Al, Sm, Ex

↑

A, S

High job demands
combined with
low social
support at work

NS

A

NM/NC

A

A

-M

↑W

↑

NS

NS

↓

Urinary
IL-1b IL-2 IL-4 IL-6 IL-10 IL-8
Confounders

High quantitative
workload

Low job control
High job demands

Case: Those
Low job satisfaction
who consulted
caregiver
Control: Age,
sex matched
controls

Nurses

CS, CC Taxi drivers vs.
age-matched
controls

Study
Sample (M/F) design

1998 45 (56) M/−

Year

Mommersteeg Netherlands 2006 44M/50W

Country

First author

Table 7
Association between psychosocial job stressors and cytokines (IL-1b, IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10)

Germany

Finland

Italy

Korea

Germany

von Kanel

Hintikka

Amati

Lee

Bellingrath

School teachers

Occupation

2010 21M/34W

2010 −/38W

2010 26M/75W

CS

School teachers

L (8
Nurses
mon)

L (12
Nurses
mon)

2009 93M/132W
CC, FU General
19 Cases/206
population
controls
without
employment

CS

Study
Sample (M/F) design

2008 55M/112W

Year

High ERI
High
overcommitment

NS

NS

NS

↑

↑

Low job satisfaction ↑
High objective
stress
High subjective
stress

↑

↓

↓

A, Med, Dep, Sm

A, Sm

NM/NC

A, S, Ms, Ed,
Sm, Ex, Al,
BMI, PC, Dp

S, A, AL, Sm, Sl,
BP, Med, BMI,
HR

Urinary
IL-1b IL-2 IL-4 IL-6 IL-10 IL-8
Confounders

Unemployment
stress

Burnout syndrome:
low personal
accomplishments
(LPA), high
depresonalization
(HD), high
emotional
exhaustion
(HEE)

Exposure

M men; F women; CS cross-sectional; CC case–control; L longitudinal; C3 complement component 3; C4 complement component 4; IL interleukin; IFN interferon; TNF tumor necrosis
factor; TGF transforming growth factor; CRP C-reactive protein; hs high sensitive; ERI effort reward imbalance; A age; S sex; R race; Ed educational level; Ms marital status; Sm smoking; Al
alcohol consumption; Ex physical exercise; Sl sleep; Anx anxiety; BMI body mass index; Med medication usage; Conf interpersonal conflict at work; BL blood lead concentration; HRT hormone replacement therapy; WkEx work experience; WkSch work schedule; PC physical condition; Occup occupation; Caf caffeine intake; Com commuting time; Jobsat job satisfaction; IC
income; NM/NC not mentioned or not controlled for
↓ = decrease, ↑ = increase, NS = no significant change

Country

First author

2003

UK

Sweden

Germany

Japan

Israel

Israel

Hemingway

Grossi

Schnorpfeil

Sakami

Shirom

Shirom

2006

2005

2004

2003

2003

Year

First author Country

CS

CC

CC

CS

917M/622W CS

933M/630W CS

71M/−

272M/52W

20 Cases/43
controls

−/63W

168M/
115W

Exposure

Burnout syndrome

Apparently
healthy
employees

Apparently
healthy
employees

Low job
satisfaction

Burnout syndrome

Non-smoking High quantitative
firefighters
workload

Airplane
High job demands
manufactur- Low job control
ing plant
Low social support
at work

White-collar
employees
(social
insurance
offices)

Civil servants Low job control
High job demands

Study
Sample (M/F) design Occupation

NS

↑

↑
NS

NS

A, Sm, BMI,
Ex, HDL,
fasting
glucose, BP,
triglycerides,
HRT, Dep,
Anx

A

A, S, Sm

A, BMI, HRT,
Dep, Sm

A, S

M↑/W- A, BMI, Sm,
Ex, HRT,
Dep, Anx,
HDL, fasting
glucose, BP,
triglycerides

M−/
W↑

↑

NS

NS

IFN- TNF-a/ TNF-a/ CRP/
IFN-g TNF-a TGF-b g/L-4 IL-4
IL-10 hsCRP Confounders

Table 8
Association between psychosocial job stressors and cytokines (IFN-g, TNF-a, TGF-b) and inflammatory markers

China

Israel

Germany

Sun

Shirom

von Kanel

2008

2008

CS

CC

CS

55M/112W

CS

Exposure

High job demands
combined with
low social
support at work

Various
industries

Managers

School
teachers

Burnout syndrome:
Low personal
accomplishments
(LPA), high
depresonalization
(HD), high
emotional
exhaustion (HEE)

High workload
Low perceived
control
Low social support
at work

High job strain

Burnout

Participants Burnout
recruited via
websites

White-collar
workers
(manufacturing
company)

Civil servants High effort-reward
imbalance

738M/383W L (18 Apparently
mon) healthy
employees

634M/585W CS

290M/−

Netherlands 2007

Langelaan

2007

44M/50W
49 Cases/38
controls

Mommersteeg Netherlands 2006

Japan

Miyazaki

92M/– (non- CS
smoking)

241M
(142M)/−

2006

UK

Hamer

Study
Sample (M/F) design Occupation

2006

Year

First author Country

NS

NS

↓

↑

NS

NS

NS

NS

↑

(continued)

S, A, AL, Sm,
Sl, BP, Med,
BMI, HR

A, S, Ed, Sm,
Ex, BMI,
Med, Dp,
HRT (W)

A, S, Ed, M,
AL, Sm, Ex

Sm, Ex

S, A, BMI
matched
(Med
excluded)

A, Al, Sm, Ex

A, BMI

IFN- TNF-a/ TNF-a/ CRP/
IFN-g TNF-a TGF-b g/L-4 IL-4
IL-10 hsCRP Confounders

2008

USA

Finland

Italy

Korea

Germany

JanickiDeverts

Hintikka

Amati

Lee

Bellingrath

21M/34W

−/38W

26M/75W

CS

School
teachers

L (8
Nurses
mon)

L (12 Nurses
mon)

High ERI
High
overcommitment

High objective stress NS
High subjective
stress

Low job satisfaction ↑

NM/NC
A, Sm

A, Med, Dep,
Sm

NS
↓

↑

A, S, Ms, Ed,
Sm, Ex, Al,
BMI, PC, Dp

↑

Unemployment
93M/132W CC, FU General
stress
population
19 Cases/206
without
controls
employment

1,093M/−

A, R, BMI, IC,
Year 5
employment,
Year 7 CRP

IFN- TNF-a/ TNF-a/ CRP/
IFN-g TNF-a TGF-b g/L-4 IL-4
IL-10 hsCRP Confounders
↑

Exposure

Unemployment
FU (5 Various
years) occupations stress
(not
reported)

Study
Sample (M/F) design Occupation

M men; F women; CS cross-sectional; CC case–control; L longitudinal; C3 complement component 3; C4 complement component 4; IL interleukin; IFN interferon; TNF tumor necrosis factor;
TGF transforming growth factor; CRP C-reactive protein; hs high sensitive; ERI effort reward imbalance; A age; S sex; R race; Ed educational level; Ms marital status; Sm smoking; Al alcohol
consumption; Ex physical exercise; Sl sleep; Anx anxiety; BMI body mass index; Med medication usage; Conf interpersonal conflict at work; BL blood lead concentration; HRT hormone replacement therapy; WkEx work experience; WkSch work schedule; PC physical condition; Occup occupation; Caf caffeine intake; Com commuting time; Jobsat job satisfaction; IC income; NM/NC not
mentioned or not controlled for
↓ = decrease, ↑ = increase, NS = no significant change

2010

2010

2010

2009

Year

First author Country

Table 8
(continued)

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

59

necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and white blood cell (WBC) counts, as
well as allostatic load indicators (19, 31, 32, 34, 35). Four out of
five studies (19, 31, 32, 34) found that job strain was not related
to these inflammatory markers. However, one study demonstrated
that high job demands and low social support at work were
significantly related to an increase of CRP while low job control
was associated with elevated TNF-α (35). Hence, lymphocyte subsets appear to be a more sensitive immune marker to job strain
than inflammatory markers.
4.2. Effort–Reward
Imbalance
and Immunity

In parallel to the job strain model which exclusively focused on the
job task profile, Siegrist formulated the effort–reward imbalance
(ERI) model (37, 38), which is known to hold a significant predictive
power for adverse health outcomes (39, 40). This model postulates
that job strain is not merely a product of employee efforts but
results from an imbalance between the efforts spent and the rewards
(money, career opportunities, esteem, respect, and job security)
received. The model also considers a personal characteristic referred
to as overcommitment. Overcommitment refers to a set of attitudes,
behaviors, and emotions reflecting excessive endeavor in combination
with a strong desire for approval and esteem. Reviews of the ERI
model concluded that employees reporting overcommitment and
exerting a high level of effort, but receiving a low level of rewards,
may experience an increased risk of psychological and physical
health disorders (39, 40).
To date, several studies have used the ERI model in relation to
immune parameters (41–45). In a sample of 537 German factory
workers (89% men), Bosch et al. examined the link between ERI
measures and CD4+/CD8+ ratio and late-differentiated
(CD27−CD28−) CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (41). They found that
reduced rewards were associated with a significantly lower CD4+/
CD8+ ratio, and decreased rewards and heightened ERI were
related to increased relative proportion and counts of late-differentiated cytotoxic T cells, suggesting that exposure to such chronic
stress may promote immunosenescence (aging of the immune
system). A study of German school teachers (34 women and 21
men) examined whether high ERI and overcommitment modulate
the immune response after exposure to acute/stressful experimental tasks (an extemporaneous speech followed by mental arithmetic) (42). Authors hypothesized that those who perceived high job
stress may maintain a poor immune status but their immune system can also be vulnerable when confronted with novel/acute
stressors. The results revealed that the high ERI stress group at
baseline had lowered CD4+ T cells, NK cells, and IL-10, and elevated TNF-α and IL-6 compared to the low ERI stress group, but
immune responses to the subsequent acute experimental task were
somewhat different for the high and low stress groups. Both high
and low stress groups showed an increment of CD4+ T and NK

60

A. Nakata

cells but an increase of these cells in response to acute stress in the
high stress group was dampened compared to the response of the
low stress group. In addition, those under low stress had an
increased secretion of anti-inflammatory (IL-10) cytokine and a
decreased secretion of pro-inflammatory (IL-2) cytokine after
exposure to acute stress but those with high stress showed an
opposite reaction, i.e., a decrease of IL-10 and an increase of IL-2,
after exposure to acute stressors. This means that the immune
responses of those with low stress at baseline could flexibly respond
to additional stress exposure but those under high stress may not
have adaptable immune response. Another study with a similar
experimental protocol demonstrated that the ERI score was
significantly and positively associated with high-sensitivity (hs)
CRP after exposure to acute mental stress in a sample of 92 healthy
working men (43). More recently, a study of white-collar employees reported that the counts of NK cells were inversely associated
with effort and ERI and positively associated with reward scores
but not with overcommitment in men; the reward score was positively associated with NKCC and inversely associated with B cells
(44). A study of disability workers (at adult training and support
services and community residential units) in Australia reported on
the relationship between ERI and salivary IgA (s-IgA) and found
that reward was positively associated with s-IgA while the ERI ratio
was inversely related to s-IgA, suggesting the impairment of the
oral mucosal host defense system (45).
All in all, ERI, especially reward seems to be a significant indicator of reduced immune function but prospective studies are necessary to allow causal conclusions.
4.3. Social Support
at Work and Immunity

Social networks and support have been associated with a broad
range of physical and mental outcomes, including cardiovascular
disorders (46), hypertension (47), depression (48), sleep disorders
(11), and all-cause mortality (49). According to Kahn and
Antonucci, social support is characterized by affective support (i.e.,
loving, liking, and respect), confirmation (i.e., confirming the
moral and factual “rightness” of actions and statements), and direct
help (e.g., aid in work, giving information or money) (50). These
various aspects of social support are usually highly interrelated.
Studies reported during the 1990s suggested that emotional and
tangible social support is related to a better immune function (51).
Among the clinical population, higher social support has been
reported to be protective against stress-induced immunosuppression. For example, among ovarian cancer patients, social support
was significantly correlated with NKCA even after adjusting for
cancer stage (52). Similarly, among breast cancer patients, the perception of higher quality emotional support from a spouse or intimate other and perceived social support from the physician was
associated with higher NKCA (53). Moreover, in several studies,

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

61

social support was found to be a significant predictor of CD4+ T
cell counts among human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive
patients (54–56). A review of 81 studies on the relationship
between social support and physiological processes concluded that
social support is reliably related to beneficial effects in the cardiovascular, neuroendocrine, and immune systems (57).
Although social support has been identified as a significant
candidate for alleviating stress-induced immunosuppression, not
many studies have explicitly focused on the effects of workplace
social support on immune outcomes. In the job stress research
field, social support at work is often measured with regard to the
source of support, i.e., support from supervisors or support from
colleagues, although in many cases the sources of support are combined into one variable. Using search engines, 11 studies were
identified that examined the relationship between social support at
work and immunity (26, 28, 29, 33, 34, 36, 41, 58–61). Among
these reports, seven studies (28, 33, 36, 41, 58–60) found
significant beneficial effects of workplace social support on immune
indicators such as increased CD4+/CD8+ ratio (41), NK cells
(59), CD8+ T cells (28), IL-4 (60), and reduced late-differentiated
(CD27−CD28−) CD8+ cytotoxic T cells (41), IL-6 (58), IgG
(33), and s-IgA (36). It is important to note that these findings are
consistent with the biological significance of the link between social
support and immunity.
4.4. Job Satisfaction
and Immunity

Job satisfaction, defined as the degree of pleasure a worker derives
from his/her job, is one of the most widely studied constructs in
occupational health psychology (62). Job satisfaction can be considered to be a global feeling about the job or as a related constellation of attitudes about various aspects or facets of the job. The
former is often called global or general job satisfaction and the latter is called facet job satisfaction (63). It is often used as a summary
measure of worker well-being because it captures not only microlevel daily interactions on the job but also macro-level factors
related to selection into a job (64). Given its popularity, there is a
considerable amount of literature that links job satisfaction with
various health measures including mental and physical health status
(65), health behaviors (66, 67), and sickness absences (68–71).
A comprehensive meta-analysis based on 485 studies of job satisfaction and health reported that workers with low levels of satisfaction were more likely to experience anxiety, burnout, depression,
cardiovascular disease, musculoskeletal disorders, and other physical illnesses, indicating that reduced job satisfaction is an important
predictor of physical and psychological health (65). Some previous
reports revealed that job satisfaction was positively associated with
well-being over time (72, 73). Therefore, job satisfaction could be
a key psychosocial determinant of worker health and well-being.

62

A. Nakata

The connection between job satisfaction and health is widely
acknowledged as mentioned earlier, but such findings are mostly
based on subjective health outcomes derived from questionnaires
or through self-report, and have not often been investigated
through objective outcomes, especially immune measures. To date,
only a handful of studies have attempted to examine the effects of
job satisfaction on immunity (31, 58, 74–76). For example, a study
of Norwegian female nurses (n = 34) found that a sum of facetspecific job satisfaction consisting of comfort, challenge, financial
rewards, relations with coworkers, and resource adequacy and promotions, was significantly associated with decreased circulating
IgA and complement component C3 but not with IgG or IgM
(74). A large cohort study in Israel (917 men and 622 women)
reported that facet-specific job satisfaction was inversely correlated
with CRP in men (B = −0.20, p < 0.05) but not in women (B = −0.10,
p > 0.05) (31). In contrast, global job satisfaction was inversely correlated with serum interleukin (IL)-6 in women but not in men in
a sample of Swedish working people (141 women and 102 men)
(75). A prospective study of job stress and immunity among nurses
(75 women and 26 men) found that those who had undergone a
decrease in job satisfaction over a 1-year period had increased levels
of IL-1β, IL-6, and CD8+ CD57+ T cells, and a decreased level of
interferon (IFN)-γ (58). More recently, Nakata et al. reported the
relationship between job satisfaction and NKCA and lymphocyte
subsets (T, B, and NK cells) among 306 healthy white-collar
employees (76). Global job satisfaction, as measured by a 4-item
scale, was significantly associated with NKCA and NK cell counts
in women and positively related to NKCA but not NK cell counts
in men; no significant association between job satisfaction and T or
B cells was found in the study.
Taken altogether, these studies suggest that greater job satisfaction may have a positive impact on immune outcomes. However,
the findings need to be interpreted cautiously because most studies
were based on cross-sectional designs with a limited number of
participants in some studies. An interesting question for future
research is whether greater job satisfaction contributes to recovery/maintenance of NK cell immunity and host defense over
time.
4.5. Unemployment,
Job Insecurity,
Economic Recession,
Organizational
Downsizing, and
Immunity

As a result of globalization, increasing competition, and long-lasting
global economic recession, people who are working under insecure
and casual employment are increasing. Corresponding to such
labor market status, unemployment, downsizing, restructuring,
reorganization, and merging have become a common trend in
modern work life. The loss of one’s job as well as working under
insecure conditions is highly stressful because, for most employed
adults, work is a central part of one’s life and identity and a major

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

63

source of income (77). Studies of unemployment suggest that
unemployment is not only related to future premature morbidity
and mortality of unemployed individuals but is also known to be a
threat of their families’ health (78). Similarly, downsizing and
restructuring are health risks not only for employees who lose their
job, but also for those who remained in employment (79–81).
As such, employees in insecure jobs are repeatedly found to have
higher stress-related health problems because job insecurity involves
both the threat of job loss and uncertainty regarding future employment (82, 83). Although a number of studies have found adverse
effects of unemployment, job insecurity, and organizational
restructuring on health (79–86), there are only a limited amount
of studies that specifically focused on the relationship between
unemployment, job insecurity, and the immune system (87–95).
One of the first studies that has dealt with unemployment and
immunity was reported from Sweden (88). A study by Arnetz et al.
evaluated the immunological impact of unemployment over a
period of 12 months in women. In this study, two unemployment
conditions (i.e., those who received traditional unemployment
benefits only (Group A, n = 9) and those who received the same
benefits as Group A along with an opportunity to participate in a
psychological program designed to counteract the negative psychosocial impact of unemployment and creating or finding new
jobs (Group B, n = 8)) were compared with a group of workers in
stable jobs (Group C, n = 8). At the 9- and 12-month follow-up
periods (but not at 4- or 7-months), both unemployed groups had
a significant decrease in their cellular immune response as measured by a lymphocyte transformation test, i.e., phytohemagglutinin A (PHA) and purified protein derivation of tuberculin (PPD),
suggesting a functional decline of helper (CD4+) T cells. There
were no significant differences between the groups regarding
counts of lymphocyte subsets (CD4+, CD8+, NK, T, B, and total
lymphocytes). The results indicate two important aspects of unemployment stress related to immunity. First, the effects of unemployment stress on cellular immune competence emerged after a
period of time, even after a year, which indicates a long-lasting and
time-lagged effect. Second, although it may largely depend on
how psychological support was provided to the unemployed
women in Group B, the effects of unemployment stress on immunity was not buffered by the psychological interventions used in
this study. This research group later conducted a similar study of
unemployment and immunity involving a larger sample of bluecollar workers (n = 354, 75% women) with a longer follow-up
period (2 years), and reported that unemployment was associated
with a reduced response to PHA stimulation at the 12-month follow-up period but returned to baseline levels at the 20-month
period (87). In the latter study, the authors have considered

64

A. Nakata

whether locus of control and mastery (which measures self-control
attitude, social support, work involvement, coping, mood, mental
well-being, sleep, and depression) could modulate the impact of
unemployment stress and concluded that coping style is the key
factor that could modulate immune outcome against unemployment stress.
Another study that uncovered the relationship between unemployment and immunity has been reported from the United States
using a case–control follow-up study design of 100 unemployed
persons and 100 matched employed healthy controls followed over
a 4-month period (91). This study design is unique in that 25% of
the unemployed people were followed until they became reemployed, to determine whether re-employed people may be
released from the unemployment stress that was anticipated to suppress immune function. As expected, those who were persistently
unemployed had significantly lower NKCA compared to matched
employed workers throughout all measurement occasions (months
1, 2, 3, and 4). However, those who were re-employed regained
their NKCA levels by 44–72% within 1 month after reemployment,
which were comparable NKCA levels to matched employed workers. The results indicate that the termination of the major stressor
is an important factor in recovering NKCA. It is important to note
that the difference in NKCA between the unemployed and
employed was neither due to smoking status (because smokers
were excluded from the analysis) nor percentage of NK cells in the
blood. Taken together, the results showed unemployment stress
seems to reduce the function of T and NK cells but not the counts
of lymphocyte subpopulations.
The effect of unemployment stress on the immune system has
also been tested in the context of inflammatory processes. JanickiDeverts et al. examined whether unemployment history predicts
future CRP levels among young working males in the United
States (Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults
(CARDIA) study) (89). After controlling for age, race, BMI, baseline CRP, unemployment status (at year 5), and average income
across the study period, baseline unemployment status was associated with an increase of CRP levels between 5 and 8 years later.
More recently, Hintikka et al. compared the levels of IL-6 and hsCRP between the unemployed and other study participants who
consisted of 131 currently with jobs, 14 in sick leave, 52 retired, 3
students, and 6 voluntarily not working (90). Unemployment was
associated independently with an increase of IL-6 in a sex- and ageadjusted linear regression analysis but the increase was attenuated
after controlling for sex, age, marital status, economic hardship,
education, smoking, alcohol consumption, somatic diseases,
depression, and BMI, while hs-CRP was not related to unemployment. The prospective association between unemployment and
these markers was weak but additional cross-sectional analyses

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

65

revealed that unemployment was associated with a fivefold greater
odd for having an elevated inflammatory status. These findings
may partly explain higher premature morbidity and mortality
among involuntarily unemployed population.
With regard to job insecurity, Arnetz et al. examined the
effects of different phases of unemployment, i.e., anticipation of
job loss, actual job loss, and short- and long-term unemployment
status with a lymphocyte transformation test using PHA (87). The
study found that psychological stress was highest during the anticipatory phase although immunosuppression did not occur concurrently. Meanwhile, Boscolo et al. compared NKCA and
lymphocyte subsets among workers with different levels of employment security and observed that young employees with a temporary/insecure employment status had a significantly reduced
NKCA level compared to securely employed workers. However,
no significant differences were found with regard to NK, T, and B
cell subsets (93).
A study of Japanese taxi drivers evaluated the impact of the
economic recession on the immune system using a case–control
study design over 2 consecutive years (94). Immune responses to
three different mitogens, PHA, concanavalin A (Con A), and
Pokeweed mitogen (PWM) as well as levels of peripheral blood
IL-2 and IL-4 levels were evaluated and compared between taxi
drivers and age-matched controls in 1992 and 1993. In 1992,
immune response to mitogens and cytokine levels were comparable
between taxi drivers and controls (stably employed government
researchers), however, in 1993, taxi drivers had significantly lower
responses to mitogens as well as reduced IL-2 and increased IL-4
secretion. In 1992, there was no apparent economic recession, but
in 1993 a major economic recession in Japan hit the taxi drivers
drastically. The authors found that 76.4% of taxi drivers’ income
dropped from 1992 to 1993 whereas income in the control group
increased from 1992 to 1993. The study also compared the
immune responses of taxi drivers working under two different conditions: Those drivers who were permitted to work overtime
(A-type) and those who were not permitted to work overtime
(B-type). B-type taxi drivers exhibited a significantly lower response
to all three mitogens and decreased IL-2 and increased IL-4 secretion than A-type taxi drivers. Because all taxi drivers’ income was
commission-based, a restriction of working time as in B-type condition, these drivers may find it difficult to attain a desirable income.
In contrast, the A-type condition may have more flexibility in earning and control over time, which resulted in lower work-related
stress levels in A-type drivers. In this case, it is notable that lower
demands were associated with higher stress leading to immunosuppression suggesting that lower control over work demands
resulted in increased stress levels.

66

A. Nakata

There is one study which investigated the effects of organizational
downsizing and reorganization on the immune response (95).
Hertting and Theorell reported that after a reduction of 20% in
personnel in the health care sector (n = 31, 80% nurses) during
1995–1997, serum IgG was significantly decreased in 1998 compared to 1997. The authors concluded that as a result of a longlasting adaptation process, a flattened circadian cortisol rhythm
may have contributed to physiological dysfunction leading to an
inhibited IgG level.
On balance, these studies revealed that the objective work
environment as represented by unemployment, job insecurity, economic recession, and restructuring/downsizing is a potentially
significant factor that lead to deterioration in the immune system,
which may help explain premature morbidity and mortality in
workers who had undergone such events.
4.6. Burnout
and Immunity

Burnout is a chronic affective state characterized by persistent
exhaustion, cynical work attitude, diminished competence, reduced
energy, increased irritability, impaired sleep, and concentration
problems that can occur irrespective of the type of profession (96).
According to Maslach and Jackson, burnout consists of three main
interrelated concepts, i.e., emotional exhaustion, depersonalization (cynicism), and reduced personal accomplishments, none of
which overlap with any other concepts such as depression or anxiety, and which is conceptually distinct from a temporary state of
fatigue (97). Burnout has been considered as an independent risk
factor for mental disorders such as depression (98–100) as well as
physical disorders, i.e., cardiovascular disease (101, 102), type 2
diabetes (103), and gastroenteritis (104). It is also considered as a
strong risk factor of prolonged sickness absences (105–107) that
may be connected with loss of productivity.
As burnout is a result of chronic work-related stress, occupational health researchers have explored the psychophysiological
mechanisms of burnout. Several researchers have specifically
focused on the immune responses to burnout and a total of eight
studies have been reported to date (108–114). Bargellini et al.
reported that physicians with low scores on personal accomplishment (which is one of three subcomponents of burnout) showed
significant decreases in total lymphocytes, CD3+ T, CD4+ T, and
CD8+ T cells as compared with physicians with higher scores
(108). Nakamura et al. used the Maslach Burnout Inventory (96)
among male office workers and found that depersonalization but
not personal accomplishment or emotional exhaustion was
inversely associated with NKCA (110). A study by Lerman et al.
used a leukocyte adhesiveness/aggregation test as a non-specific
marker of inflammation and reported that university employees
with high burnout symptoms showed an increased leukocyte adhesiveness/aggregation (111). They also reported that subcomponents

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

67

of burnout, i.e., emotional exhaustion, chronic fatigue, and cognitive
weariness, were all significantly associated with leukocyte adhesiveness/aggregation. More recently, researchers have started to
focus on the relationship between burnout and inflammatory
cytokines/proteins because accumulating evidence suggests a
direct relationship between burnout and arteriosclerotic diseases
(115). In a large sample of healthy men and women, Toker et al.
found that burnout was positively associated with hs-CRP in
women but not in men (112). In contrast, no significant difference in CRP was found between burned-out employees and a control group among managers of a Dutch Telecom Company (114).
In white-collar female employees in Sweden, those participants
with high burnout exhibited higher plasma levels of TNF-α than
counterparts with lower burnout scores but there were no
significant differences in CRP and TNF-β levels between the two
groups (113). Among school teachers in Germany, higher levels of
total burnout symptoms were associated with a lower level of IL-4
and higher TNF-α/IL-4 ratio while lack of accomplishment was
associated with diminished IL-4 and heightened TNF-α/IL-4
ratio (116). In more severe cases of burnout, Mommersteeg et al.
reported that the burnout group had an increased production of
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 released by monocytes but not
by T cells (109). The study did not find significant differences
between the burnout group and healthy controls with regard to
proinflammatory cytokines gamma interferon and TNF-α or
counts of T, B, and NK cells.
In sum, burnout seems to be associated with immune parameters to some extent but further explorations are needed to find
robust and sensitive immune markers for burnout.
4.7. Other PsychoSocial Job Stress
and Immunity

Apart from job strain and ERI models, earlier studies have focused
on certain type of jobs that were considered to be inherently stressful such as air traffic controllers (117), teachers (118), nurses (74,
119–122), and bank employees (123). Several studies focused on
s-IgA (117, 119–121) and other studies focused on serum/plasma
immunoglobulin G, A, and M (33, 74, 118). However, the associations between psychosocial job stress and the immunoglobulin
markers were inconsistent between these studies. With regard to
s-IgA, for example, Zeier et al. found that exposure to job stress
caused increased s-IgA among air traffic controllers (117). In contrast, two studies in nurses reported a decrease of s-IgA due to a
high nursing stress (120, 121), while in an 8-month longitudinal
study, nurses with higher objective stress showed consistently
higher s-IgA than their lower stress counterparts (124). The relationship between job stress and serum/plasma immunoglobulin
levels seems also to be contradictory. Some studies reported that
job stress increases IgG (28, 33), IgM (28), or IgA (74) levels,

68

A. Nakata

while other studies suggested that job stress reduces IgG (95) or
IgM (74, 118) levels, or impact on IgG and IgA levels (30).
With regard to cellular immunity, eight studies have reported
on the relationship between psychosocial job stressors and lymphocyte subsets and NKCA. Two studies from Italy reported that
university employees with high levels of occupational stress, high
anxiety levels, and job insecurity had reduced NKCA (93, 125).
Among Japanese physicians, overwork was associated with
decreased NKCA and CD4+ T cell counts (126). Similarly, two
studies of Japanese nurses reported that high quantitative workload and frequent conflict with physicians were inversely associated
with NKCA (127), while high quantitative workload and high variance in workload were inversely correlated with NK cell counts
(61). A study which focused on overtime (amount of time beyond
normal working hours) and cellular immunity reported that overtime was inversely associated with a decrease in NK cell counts in
white-collar male and female workers (128). However, there are
several studies that found an insignificant relationship between
quantitative workload and cellular immune indicators. A study in
an electric equipment manufacturing company reported that quantitative workload and mental demand was not independently
related to counts of CD3+ T, CD4+ T, and CD8+ T cells among
male employees (129). Similarly, no direct association between
quantitative workload and T or NK cell counts were found in male
white-collar workers (60). Inconsistent findings in these studies
may be related to differences in intensity and length of stress exposures (acute vs. chronic), timing of blood sampling, differences in
psychosocial job stress instruments used, and confounding factors
considered.
Regarding urinary immune indicators, a study focused on
nurses compared the level of urinary IL-8 between acute and
chronic care (control group) departments and found that those in
the acute care department exhibited higher stress and increased
urinary IL-8 compared with the control group (130). Because
urine sampling is non-invasive and painless, authors concluded that
urinary IL-8 may be a convenient immune marker for stress assessment among nurses.

5. Future
Directions
and Conclusions

The relationship between psychosocial job stress and immunity has
only been explored during the past few decades, and is therefore
still in a developing phase within the discipline of PNI. In consideration of this fact, future studies should elaborate on the following

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

69

methodological shortcomings. First, to strengthen the cause and
effect relationship, prospective studies with multiple waves are
needed. As listed in Tables 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, most investigations
have been based on cross-sectional or case–control study designs.
Although some studies used a prospective approach, they suffer
from small sample sizes or high dropout rates, which make it
difficult to generalize the results. Second, a number of confounding factors need to be taken into account in future studies. In earlier studies, confounders which modify dependent and independent
variables, such as sociodemographic (age, sex, race, education, etc.)
factors, health behaviors (smoking, sleep, alcohol consumption,
exercise, caffeine, diet, etc.), physical/mental health status (comorbid disorders, body mass, etc.), and medication usage (antihypertensive or anti-depressive drugs, oral contraceptive use, etc.) are
not always taken into account. It is also true that the immediate
state before the blood sampling, i.e., how long participants slept
the night before, timing (morning vs. night, beginning or end of
the weekday) and condition (fasting vs. non-fasting blood sampling), menstrual cycle (women), and other exposures related to
work (hazardous substances, radiation, etc.) need to be considered
since they can have a direct impact on immune measurements.
Third, it is essential to use well-established job stress measures with
high validity and reliability; it is also important to use measures
which cover various and broad aspects of working conditions.
Stress measures should be carefully selected because some job stress
measures may not be suitable for certain groups, occupations, and
jobs. Fourth, immune indicators which measure both functional
and quantitative aspects may be useful to measure systemic immune
response to job stress. It is also desirable to find sensitive noninvasive (saliva or urine) measures that reflect job stress. These
issues should be considered when one is designing a study regarding job stress and immunity.
In this review, we find that job stressors are associated with
various immune parameters indicating disrupted immune functioning. The relationship between job stress and NK cell immunity
was found to be robust but the relationships with other immune
markers were less clear cut because of methodological issues raised
above. A continued effort is needed to establish a cause and effect
association between job stressors and immunity.

Acknowledgements
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.

70

A. Nakata

References
1. Siegrist J (2010) Effort-reward imbalance at
work and cardiovascular diseases. Int J Occup
Med Environ Health 23:279–285
2. Eller NH, Netterstrom B, Gyntelberg F et al
(2009) Work-related psychosocial factors and
the development of ischemic heart disease: a
systematic review. Cardiol Rev 17:83–97
3. Kivimaki M, Virtanen M, Elovainio M,
Kouvonen A, Vaananen A, Vahtera J (2006)
Work stress in the etiology of coronary heart
disease—a meta-analysis. Scand J Work
Environ Health 32:431–442
4. Pickering T (1997) The effects of occupational stress on blood pressure in men and
women.
Acta
Physiol
Scand
Suppl
640:125–128
5. Boscolo P, Youinou P, Theoharides TC,
Cerulli G, Conti P (2008) Environmental and
occupational stress and autoimmunity.
Autoimmun Rev 7:340–343
6. van Rijn RM, Huisstede BM, Koes BW,
Burdorf A (2010) Associations between workrelated factors and specific disorders of the
shoulder—a systematic review of the literature. Scand J Work Environ Health
36:189–201
7. Bonde JP (2008) Psychosocial factors at work
and risk of depression: a systematic review of
the epidemiological evidence. Occup Environ
Med 65:438–445
8. Netterstrom B, Conrad N, Bech P et al (2008)
The relation between work-related psychosocial factors and the development of depression. Epidemiol Rev 30:118–132
9. Stansfeld S, Candy B (2006) Psychosocial
work environment and mental health—a
meta-analytic review. Scand J Work Environ
Health 32:443–462
10. Nieuwenhuijsen K, Bruinvels D, FringsDresen M (2010) Psychosocial work environment and stress-related disorders, a systematic
review. Occup Med (Lond) 60:277–286
11. Nakata A, Haratani T, Takahashi M et al
(2004) Job stress, social support, and prevalence of insomnia in a population of Japanese
daytime
workers.
Soc
Sci
Med
59:1719–1730
12. Perdikaris P, Kletsiou E, Gymnopoulou E,
Matziou V (2010) The relationship between
workplace, job stress and nurses’ tobacco use:
a review of the literature. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 7:2362–2375
13. Grunberg L, Moore S, Anderson-Connolly R,
Greenberg E (1999) Work stress and selfreported alcohol use: the moderating role of

escapist reasons for drinking. J Occup Health
Psychol 4:29–36
14. Heraclides AM, Chandola T, Witte DR,
Brunner EJ (2012) Work stress, obesity and
the risk of type 2 diabetes: gender-specific
bidirectional effect in the Whitehall II study.
Obesity (Silver Spring) 20(2):428–433
15. Segerstrom
SC,
Miller
GE
(2004)
Psychological stress and the human immune
system: a meta-analytic study of 30 years of
inquiry. Psychol Bull 130:601–630
16. Zorrilla EP, Luborsky L, McKay JR et al
(2001) The relationship of depression and
stressors to immunological assays: a meta-analytic
review.
Brain
Behav
Immun
15:199–226
17. McEwen BS, Gianaros PJ (2011) Stress- and
allostasis-induced brain plasticity. Annu Rev
Med 62:431–445
18. Bellingrath S, Weigl T, Kudielka BM (2009)
Chronic work stress and exhaustion is associated with higher allostatic load in female
school teachers. Stress 12:37–48
19. Sun J, Wang S, Zhang JQ, Li W (2007)
Assessing the cumulative effects of stress: the
association between job stress and allostatic
load in a large sample if Chinese employees.
Work Stress 21:333–347
20. Karasek RA (1979) Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: implication
for job design. Admin Sci Q 24:285–307
21. Tsutsumi A, Kayaba K, Ishikawa S (2011)
Impact of occupational stress on stroke across
occupational classes and genders. Soc Sci Med
72:1652–1658
22. Heraclides A, Chandola T, Witte DR, Brunner
EJ (2009) Psychosocial stress at work doubles
the risk of type 2 diabetes in middle-aged
women: evidence from the Whitehall II study.
Diabetes Care 32:2230–2235
23. Rugulies R, Krause N (2005) Job strain, isostrain, and the incidence of low back and neck
injuries. A 7.5-year prospective study of San
Francisco transit operators. Soc Sci Med
61:27–39
24. Suominen S, Vahtera J, Korkeila K, Helenius
H, Kivimaki M, Koskenvuo M (2007) Job
strain, life events, and sickness absence: a longitudinal cohort study in a random population
sample. J Occup Environ Med 49:990–996
25. Hausser JA, Mojzisch A, Nielsen M, SchulzHardt S (2010) Ten years on: a review of
recent research on the job demand-control
(-support) model and psychological wellbeing. Work Stress 24:1–35

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

26. Kawakami N, Tanigawa T, Araki S et al (1997)
Effects of job strain on helper-inducer
(CD4+CD29+)
and
suppressor-inducer
(CD4+CD45RA+) T cells in Japanese bluecollar workers. Psychother Psychosom
66:192–198
27. Meijman TF, van Dormolen M, Herber RFM,
Rogen H, Kuiper S (1995) Job strain, neuroendocrine activation, and immune status.
In: Sauter SL, Murphy LR (eds) Organizational
risk factors for job stress. American
Psychological Association, Washington, DC,
pp 113–126
28. Nakata A, Araki S, Tanigawa T et al (2000)
Decrease of suppressor-inducer (CD4+
CD45RA) T lymphocytes and increase of
serum immunoglobulin G due to perceived
job stress in Japanese nuclear electric power
plant workers. J Occup Environ Med
42:143–150
29. Nakata A, Tanigawa T, Fujioka Y, Kitamura F,
Iso H, Shimamoto T (2002) Association of
low job control with a decrease in memory
(CD4+ CD45RO+) T lymphocytes in
Japanese middle-aged male workers in an
electric power plant. Ind Health 40:142–148
30. Ohlson CG, Soderfeldt M, Soderfeldt B,
Jones I, Theorell T (2001) Stress markers in
relation to job strain in human service organizations. Psychother Psychosom 70:268–275
31. Shirom A, Toker S, Berliner S, Shapir I,
Melamed S (2006) Work-related vigor and
job satisfaction relationships with inflammation
biomarkers among employed adults. In: Fave
A (ed) Dimensions of well-being: research
and intervention. Franco Angeli, Milano, pp
254–274
32. Hemingway H, Shipley M, Mullen MJ et al
(2003) Social and psychosocial influences on
inflammatory markers and vascular function
in civil servants (the Whitehall II study). Am J
Cardiol 92:984–987
33. Theorell T, Orth-Gomer K, Eneroth P (1990)
Slow-reacting immunoglobulin in relation to
social support and changes in job strain: a preliminary note. Psychosom Med 52:511–516
34. Clays E, De Bacquer D, Delanghe J, Kittel F,
Van Renterghem L, De Backer G (2005)
Associations between dimensions of job stress
and biomarkers of inflammation and infection. J Occup Environ Med 47:878–883
35. Schnorpfeil P, Noll A, Schulze R, Ehlert U,
Frey K, Fischer JE (2003) Allostatic load and
work conditions. Soc Sci Med 57:647–656
36. Masilamani R, Darus A, Su TA, Ali R,
Mahmud AB, David K (2012) Salivary biomarkers of stress among teachers in an urban

71

setting. Asia Pac J Public Health
24(2):278–287
37. Siegrist J, Starke D, Chandola T et al (2004)
The measurement of effort-reward imbalance
at work: European comparisons. Soc Sci Med
58:1483–1499
38. Siegrist J (1996) Adverse health effects of
high-effort/low-reward conditions. J Occup
Health Psychol 1:27–41
39. Tsutsumi A, Kawakami N (2004) A review of
empirical studies on the model of effortreward imbalance at work: reducing occupational stress by implementing a new theory.
Soc Sci Med 59:2335–2359
40. van Vegchel N, de Jonge J, Bosma H, Schaufeli
W (2005) Reviewing the effort-reward imbalance model: drawing up the balance of 45
empirical
studies.
Soc
Sci
Med
60:1117–1131
41. Bosch JA, Fischer JE, Fischer JC (2009)
Psychologically adverse work conditions are
associated with CD8+ T cell differentiation
indicative of immunosenescence. Brain Behav
Immun 23:527–534
42. Bellingrath S, Rohleder N, Kudielka BM
(2010) Healthy working school teachers with
high effort-reward-imbalance and overcommitment show increased pro-inflammatory
immune activity and a dampened innate
immune defence. Brain Behav Immun
24:1332–1339
43. Hamer M, Williams E, Vuonovirta R,
Giacobazzi P, Gibson EL, Steptoe A (2006)
The effects of effort-reward imbalance on
inflammatory and cardiovascular responses to
mental stress. Psychosom Med 68:408–413
44. Nakata A, Takahashi M, Irie M (2011) Effortreward imbalance, overcommitment, and cellular immune measures among white-collar
employees. Biol Psychol 88:270–279
45. Wright BJ (2011) Effort-reward imbalance is
associated with salivary immunoglobulin a
and cortisol secretion in disability workers. J
Occup Environ Med 53:308–312
46. Barth J, Schneider S, von Kanel R (2010)
Lack of social support in the etiology and the
prognosis of coronary heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychosom
Med 72:229–238
47. Bell CN, Thorpe RJ Jr, Laveist TA (2010)
Race/ethnicity and hypertension: the role of
social support. Am J Hypertens 23:534–540
48. Ikeda T, Nakata A, Takahashi M et al (2009)
Correlates of depressive symptoms among
workers in small- and medium-scale manufacturing enterprises in Japan. J Occup Health
51:26–37

72

A. Nakata

49. Blazer DG (1982) Social support and mortality in an elderly community population. Am J
Epidemiol 115:684–694
50. Kahn RL, Antonucci T (1980) Convoys over
the life course: attachment, roles and social
support. In: Baltes P (ed) Life span development and behavior, vol 3. Lexington Press,
Boston
51. Uchino BN (2006) Social support and health:
a review of physiological processes potentially
underlying links to disease outcomes. J Behav
Med 29:377–387
52. Lutgendorf SK, Sood AK, Anderson B et al
(2005) Social support, psychological distress,
and natural killer cell activity in ovarian cancer. J Clin Oncol 23:7105–7113
53. Levy SM, Herberman RB, Whiteside T, Sanzo
K, Lee J, Kirkwood J (1990) Perceived social
support and tumor estrogen/progesterone
receptor status as predictors of natural killer
cell activity in breast cancer patients.
Psychosom Med 52:73–85
54. Theorell T, Blomkvist V, Jonsson H, Schulman
S, Berntorp E, Stigendal L (1995) Social support and the development of immune function in human immunodeficiency virus
infection. Psychosom Med 57:32–36
55. Persson L, Gullberg B, Hanson BS, Moestrup
T, Ostergren PO (1994) HIV infection: social
network, social support, and CD4 lymphocyte values in infected homosexual men in
Malmo, Sweden. J Epidemiol Community
Health 48:580–585
56. Ullrich PM, Lutgendorf SK, Stapleton JT
(2003) Concealment of homosexual identity,
social support and CD4 cell count among
HIV-seropositive gay men. J Psychosom Res
54:205–212
57. Uchino BN, Cacioppo JT, Kiecolt-Glaser JK
(1996) The relationship between social support and physiological processes: a review
with emphasis on underlying mechanisms and
implications for health. Psychol Bull
119:488–531
58. Amati M, Tomasetti M, Ciuccarelli M et al
(2010) Relationship of job satisfaction, psychological distress and stress-related biological parameters among healthy nurses: a
longitudinal study. J Occup Health 52:31–38
59. Miyazaki T, Ishikawa T, Iimori H et al (2003)
Relationship between perceived social support
and immune function. Stress Health 19:3–7
60. Miyazaki T, Ishikawa T, Nakata A et al (2005)
Association between perceived social support
and Th1 dominance. Biol Psychol 70:30–37
61. Kawaguchi Y, Toyomasu K, Yoshida N, Baba
K, Uemoto M, Minota S (2007) Measuring

job stress among hospital nurses: an attempt
to identify biological markers. Fukuoka Igaku
Zasshi 98:48–55
62. Spector PE (1997) Job satisfaction: application, assessment, causes, and consequences.
Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA
63. van Saane N, Sluiter JK, Verbeek JH, FringsDresen MH (2003) Reliability and validity of
instruments measuring job satisfaction—a systematic review. Occup Med (Lond)
53:191–200
64. de Castro AB, Gee GC, Takeuchi D (2008)
Relationship between job dissatisfaction and
physical and psychological health among
Filipino immigrants. AAOHN J 56:33–40
65. Faragher EB, Cass M, Cooper CL (2005) The
relationship between job satisfaction and
health: a meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med
62:105–112
66. Hagihara A, Tarumi K, Nobutomo K (2000)
Work stressors, drinking with colleagues after
work, and job satisfaction among white-collar
workers in Japan. Subst Use Misuse
35:737–756
67. Frone MR, Windle M (1997) Job dissatisfaction and substance use among employed high
school students: the moderating influence of
active and avoidant coping styles. Subst Use
Misuse 32:571–585
68. Munch-Hansen T, Wieclaw J, Agerbo E,
Westergaard-Nielsen N, Bonde JP (2008)
Global measure of satisfaction with psychosocial work conditions versus measures of
specific aspects of psychosocial work conditions in explaining sickness absence. BMC
Public Health 8:270
69. Nakata A, Takahashi M, Irie M, Ray T,
Swanson NG (2010) Job satisfaction, common cold, and sickness absence among whitecollar employees: a cross-sectional survey. Ind
Health 49:116–121
70. Roelen CA, Koopmans PC, Notenbomer A,
Groothoff JW (2008) Job satisfaction and
sickness absence: a questionnaire survey.
Occup Med (Lond) 58:567–571
71. Andrea H, Beurskens AJ, Metsemakers JF,
van Amelsvoort LG, van den Brandt PA, van
Schayck CP (2003) Health problems and psychosocial work environment as predictors of
long term sickness absence in employees who
visited the occupational physician and/or
general practitioner in relation to work: a prospective study. Occup Environ Med
60:295–300
72. Winefield AH, Tiggemann M, Goldney RD
(1988) Psychological concomitants of satisfactory employment and unemployment in

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

young people. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
Epidemiol 23:149–157
73. Barrios-Choplin B, McCarty R, Cryer B
(1997) An inner quality approach to reducing
stress and improving physical and emotional
well-being at work. Stress Med 13:193–201
74. Endresen IM, Vaernes R, Ursin H, Tonder O
(1987) Psychological stress-factors and concentration of immunoglobulins and complement components in Norwegian nurses. Work
Stress 1:365–375
75. Theorell T, Hasselhorn HM, Vingard E,
Andersson B, MUSIC-Norrtalje-Study-Group
(2000) Interleukin 6 and cortisol in acute
musculoskeletal disorders: results from a casereferent study in Sweden. Stress Med
16:27–35
76. Nakata A, Takahashi M, Irie M, Swanson NG
(2010) Job satisfaction is associated with elevated natural killer cell immunity among
healthy white-collar employees. Brain Behav
Immun 24:1268–1275
77. Ensminger ME, Celentano DD (1988)
Unemployment and psychiatric distress: social
resources and coping. Soc Sci Med
27:239–247
78. Wilson SH, Walker GM (1993) Unemployment
and health: a review. Public Health
107:153–162
79. Kivimaki M, Honkonen T, Wahlbeck K et al
(2007) Organisational downsizing and
increased use of psychotropic drugs among
employees who remain in employment. J
Epidemiol Community Health 61:154–158
80. Vahtera J, Kivimaki M, Pentti J (1997) Effect
of organisational downsizing on health of
employees. Lancet 350:1124–1128
81. Dragano N, Verde PE, Siegrist J (2005)
Organisational downsizing and work stress:
testing synergistic health effects in employed
men and women. J Epidemiol Community
Health 59:694–699
82. Virtanen P, Vahtera J, Kivimaki M, Pentti J,
Ferrie J (2002) Employment security and health.
J Epidemiol Community Health 56:569–574
83. Ferrie JE, Shipley MJ, Stansfeld SA, Marmot
MG (2002) Effects of chronic job insecurity
and change in job security on self reported
health, minor psychiatric morbidity, physiological measures, and health related behaviours in British civil servants: the Whitehall II
study. J Epidemiol Community Health
56:450–454
84. Laszlo KD, Pikhart H, Kopp MS et al (2010)
Job insecurity and health: a study of 16
European
countries.
Soc
Sci
Med
70:867–874

73

85. Ferrie JE (2001) Is job insecurity harmful to
health? J R Soc Med 94:71–76
86. Ferrie JE, Shipley MJ, Marmot MG, Stansfeld
S, Smith GD (1995) Health effects of anticipation of job change and non-employment:
longitudinal data from the Whitehall II study.
BMJ 311:1264–1269
87. Arnetz BB, Brenner SO, Levi L et al (1991)
Neuroendocrine and immunologic effects of
unemployment and job insecurity. Psychother
Psychosom 55:76–80
88. Arnetz BB, Wasserman J, Petrini B et al
(1987) Immune function in unemployed
women. Psychosom Med 49:3–12
89. Janicki-Deverts D, Cohen S, Matthews KA,
Cullen MR (2008) History of unemployment
predicts future elevations in C-reactive protein
among male participants in the Coronary Artery
Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA)
study. Ann Behav Med 36:176–185
90. Hintikka J, Lehto SM, Niskanen L et al (2009)
Unemployment and ill health: a connection
through inflammation? BMC Public Health
9:410
91. Cohen F, Kemeny ME, Zegans LS, Johnson
P, Kearney KA, Stites DP (2007) Immune
function declines with unemployment and
recovers after stressor termination. Psychosom
Med 69:225–234
92. Marriott D, Kirkwood BJ, Stough C (1994)
Immunological effects of unemployment.
Lancet 344:269–270
93. Boscolo P, Di Donato A, Di Giampaolo L
et al (2009) Blood natural killer activity is
reduced in men with occupational stress and
job insecurity working in a university. Int Arch
Occup Environ Health 82:787–794
94. Nakano Y, Nakamura S, Hirata M et al (1998)
Immune function and lifestyle of taxi drivers
in Japan. Ind Health 36:32–39
95. Hertting A, Theorell T (2002) Physiological
changes associated with downsizing of personnel and reorganisation in the health care
sector. Psychother Psychosom 71:117–122
96. Maslach C, Schaufeli WB, Leiter MP (2001)
Job burnout. Annu Rev Psychol 52:397–422
97. Maslach C, Jackson SE (1981) The measurement of experienced burnout. J Occup Behav
2:99–113
98. Middeldorp CM, Cath DC, Boomsma DI
(2006) A twin-family study of the association
between employment, burnout and anxious
depression. J Affect Disord 90:163–169
99. Iacovides A, Fountoulakis KN, Kaprinis S,
Kaprinis G (2003) The relationship between
job stress, burnout and clinical depression. J
Affect Disord 75:209–221

74

A. Nakata

100. Ahola K, Honkonen T, Isometsa E et al
(2005) The relationship between job-related
burnout and depressive disorders—results
from the Finnish Health 2000 study. J Affect
Disord 88:55–62
101. Melamed S, Shirom A, Toker S, Berliner S,
Shapira I (2006) Burnout and risk of cardiovascular disease: evidence, possible causal
paths, and promising research directions.
Psychol Bull 132:327–353
102. Honkonen T, Ahola K, Pertovaara M et al
(2006) The association between burnout and
physical illness in the general population—
results from the Finnish Health 2000 study. J
Psychosom Res 61:59–66
103. Melamed S, Shirom A, Toker S, Shapira I
(2006) Burnout and risk of type 2 diabetes: a
prospective study of apparently healthy
employed
persons.
Psychosom
Med
68:863–869
104. Mohren DC, Swaen GM, Kant IJ, van
Amelsvoort LG, Borm PJ, Galama JM (2003)
Common infections and the role of burnout
in a Dutch working population. J Psychosom
Res 55:201–208
105. Hallsten L, Voss M, Stark S, Josephson M
(2011) Job burnout and job wornout as risk
factors for long-term sickness absence. Work
38:181–192
106. Borritz M, Christensen KB, Bultmann U et al
(2011) Impact of burnout and psychosocial
work characteristics on future long-term sickness absence. Prospective results of the Danish
PUMA Study among human service workers.
J Occup Environ Med 52:964–970
107. Ahola K, Kivimaki M, Honkonen T et al
(2008) Occupational burnout and medically
certified sickness absence: a population-based
study of Finnish employees. J Psychosom Res
64:185–193
108. Bargellini A, Barbieri A, Rovesti S, Vivoli R,
Roncaglia R, Borella P (2000) Relation
between immune variables and burnout in a
sample of physicians. Occup Environ Med
57:453–457
109. Mommersteeg PM, Heijnen CJ, Kavelaars A,
van Doornen LJ (2006) Immune and endocrine function in burnout syndrome.
Psychosom Med 68:879–886
110. Nakamura H, Nagase H, Yoshida M, Ogino K
(1999) Natural killer (NK) cell activity and
NK cell subsets in workers with a tendency of
burnout. J Psychosom Res 46:569–578
111. Lerman Y, Melamed S, Shragin Y et al (1999)
Association between burnout at work and leukocyte adhesiveness/aggregation. Psychosom
Med 61:828–833

112. Toker S, Shirom A, Shapira I, Berliner S,
Melamed S (2005) The association between
burnout, depression, anxiety, and inflammation
biomarkers: C-reactive protein and fibrinogen
in men and women. J Occup Health Psychol
10:344–362
113. Grossi G, Perski A, Evengard B, Blomkvist V,
Orth-Gomer K (2003) Physiological correlates of burnout among women. J Psychosom
Res 55:309–316
114. Langelaan S, Bakker AB, Schaufeli WB, van
Rhenen W, van Doornen LJ (2007) Is burnout related to allostatic load? Int J Behav Med
14:213–221
115. Kitaoka-Higashiguchi K, Morikawa Y, Miura
K et al (2009) Burnout and risk factors for
arteriosclerotic disease: follow-up study. J
Occup Health 51:123–131
116. von Kanel R, Bellingrath S, Kudielka BM
(2008) Association between burnout and circulating levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory
cytokines in schoolteachers. J Psychosom Res
65:51–59
117. Zeier H, Brauchli P, Joller-Jemelka HI (1996)
Effects of work demands on immunoglobulin
A and cortisol in air traffic controllers. Biol
Psychol 42:413–423
118. Ursin H, Mykletun R, Tonder O et al (1984)
Psychological stress-factors and concentrations of immunoglobulins and complement
components in humans. Scand J Psychol
25:340–347
119. Henningsen GM, Hurrell JJ Jr, Baker F et al
(1992) Measurement of salivary immunoglobulin A as an immunologic biomarker of
job stress. Scand J Work Environ Health
18(suppl 2):133–136
120. Ng V, Koh D, Chan G, Ong HY, Chia SE,
Ong CN (1999) Are salivary immunoglobulin A and lysozyme biomarkers of stress among
nurses? J Occup Environ Med 41:920–927
121. Yang Y, Koh D, Ng V et al (2002) Self perceived work related stress and the relation
with salivary IgA and lysozyme among emergency department nurses. Occup Environ
Med 59:836–841
122. De Gucht V, Fischler B, Demanet C (1999)
Immune dysfunction associated with chronic
professional stress in nurses. Psychiatry Res
85:105–111
123. Endresen IM, Ellertsen B, Endresen C,
Hjelmen AM, Matre R, Ursin H (1991) Stress
at work and psychological and immunological
parameters in a group of Norwegian female
bank employees. Work Stress 5:217–227
124. Lee KM, Kang D, Yoon K et al (2010) A pilot
study on the association between job stress

3

Psychosocial Job Stress and Immunity: A Systematic Review

and repeated measures of immunological
biomarkers in female nurses. Int Arch Occup
Environ Health 83:779–789
125. Di Donato A, Di Giampaolo L, Reale M et al
(2006) Effect of occupational stress and anxiety on natural killer lymphocyte activity of
men and women employed in a university. Int
J Immunopathol Pharmacol 19:79–84
126. Okamoto H, Tsunoda T, Teruya K et al
(2008) An occupational health study of emergency physicians in Japan: health assessment
by immune variables (CD4, CD8, CD56, and
NK cell activity) at the beginning of work. J
Occup Health 50:136–146
127. Morikawa Y, Kitaoka-Higashiguchi K,
Tanimoto C et al (2005) A cross-sectional
study on the relationship of job stress with
natural killer cell activity and natural killer cell

75

subsets among healthy nurses. J Occup Health
47:378–383
128. Nakata A, Takahashi M, Irie M (2012)
Association of overtime work with cellular
immune markers among healthy daytime
white-collar employees. Scand J Work Environ
Health 38:56–64
129. Sakami S, Maeda M, Maruoka T, Nakata A,
Komaki G, Kawamura N (2004) Positive
coping up- and down-regulates in vitro
cytokine productions from T cells dependent
on stress levels. Psychother Psychosom 73:
243–251
130. Fukuda H, Ichinose T, Kusama T, Sakurai R,
Anndow K, Akiyoshi N (2008) Stress
assessment in acute care department nurses
by measuring interleukin-8. Int Nurs Rev
55:407–411

Chapter 4
Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying:
Neuroendocrine Receptors Orchestrate Immune Function
Harlan P. Jones
Abstract
Over the past three decades, the field of psychoneuroimmunology research has blossomed into a major
field of study, gaining interests of researchers across all traditionally accepted disciplines of scientific
research. This chapter provides an overview of our current understanding in defining neuroimmune interactions with a primary focus of discussing the neuroendocrine receptor activity by immune cells. This
chapter highlights the necessity of neuroimmune responses as it relates to a better understanding of the
pathophysiological mechanisms of health and disease.
Key words: Neuroendocrine, Immune cells, Mechanisms, Central nervous system, Stress

1. Introduction
The immune system is recognized best for its role in protection
against pathogens, which cause disease. As a first defense, the
immune system elicits a robust non-specific response against evading
pathogens by a collection of non-cellular and cellular responses
termed the “innate” immune response. The second arm of the
immune response is termed “adaptive or acquired” immunity.
Adaptive immunity elicits a tailored and specific immune response
against the ensuing pathogen and is unique in that it elicits memory to prior pathogenic exposures. Immune activation however, is
not solely relegated to attack against foreign pathogens, but plays
an integral role regulating homeostatic conditions related to
immune surveillance against tumorogenesis and chronic
inflammatory diseases (e.g., autoimmune disease, asthma, and
rheumatoid arthritis). Thus, the immune system represents a complex network requiring tight regulatory control.

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_4, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

77

78

H.P. Jones

The central nervous system (CNS) coordinates the activation
and release of neurotransmitter and hormonal factors that translate
into physiological adaptations that protect the host from deleterious outcomes. Interactions between the neuroendocrine and
immune systems are believed to be essential in defining the mechanisms regulating infectious and non-infectious disease states. The
discipline of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) serves as a platform
in broadening our understanding of the collaborative roles of the
immune and CNSs. Over the past four decades scientists have
defined bi-directional pathways leading to novel concepts of behavioral and physiological health and disease on the basis of cellular
and molecular interactions between the immune and CNS systems
(1, 2). It is now accepted that the nervous system can receive input
from the immune system via the release of cytokines and other
immune mediators (3). Likewise, the immune system is also receptive to signals conveyed from neuroendocrine and neurotransmitter-mediated influences, suggesting a bi-directional interplay
between the release of endocrine hormone factors, neurotransmitter activity, and cytokines, respectively (4, 5). The following sections discuss current knowledge relevant to influences of the
nervous system mediators on immune function.

2. An Overview
of the Classical
Components of the
Nervous System

The neuroendocrine, autonomic, and peripheral nervous systems
represent the major pathways, linking immune and nervous system
functioning. Within the CNS, the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
axis (HPA-axis) comprised of the paraventricular nucleus (PVN),
the anterior pituitary gland and the adrenal glands mediate the
release of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the PVN,
stimulating glucocorticoid release from the adrenal gland via activation of adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH). The actions of
the CNS are largely characterized as immune suppressive (6, 7).
The autonomic nervous system (ANS), which consists of the
peripheral sympathetic nervous system (SNS) innervates numerous
sites of body and is commonly associated with the “Flight or Fight”
response. Two neurotransmitters, epinephrine and norepinephrine, are synthesized from the amino acid, tyrosine and released
from the synaptic end of SNS terminals (8, 9). Innervation of SNS
is found in several tissues, including blood vessels, liver, kidney,
intestines, lung, heart, and brain (10). In particular, Hadden et al.
(11) discovered adrenergic receptors to be expressed by human
peripheral blood lymphocytes. In the 1980s, Felten and Felten,
provided a thorough landscape of the adrenergic innervation pathways within lymphoid tissues (12). Since, major immune organs
such as lymph nodes, bone marrow, and spleen have been found to

4

Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying…

79

have SNS innervations and have been implicated in mediating
cellular immune function (13). A second component of the ANS is
the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), which operates via
vagus nerve innervation. The main neurotransmitter of the PNS is
acetylcholine (Ach), which interacts with the G protein-coupled
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors and the nicotinic ligand-gated
ion channels. PNS innervation is believed to mediate immune
function through projections within the postrema, connecting to
the HPA and subsequently activating the SNS through the rostroventrolateral medulla. Through the efferent arc found in the
dorsal motor nucleus, vagal activity is produced by the release of
Ach at the vagal postsynaptic neurons. In terms of it its impact on
immune function, vagal stimulation has been shown to evoke
anti-inflammatory responses and in many ways counteracts the robust
inflammatory response produced in response to initial infection
or inflammatory insults (13, 14).
Through activation of these major nervous system pathways,
we now know that immune responses in part receive distinct signals that instruct immune function. The discussions that follow
address questions as to how neuronal factors of the nervous system
convey instruction to the immune system and modify the phenotype of cellular immune constituents.

3. Neuroendocrine
Receptor
Expression by
Immune Cells as
Determinants of
Cellular Immune
Function

3.1. Glucocorticoid
Receptor-Mediated
Responses

Neuroimmunomodulation is based on a number of intrinsic (e.g.,
genetic, organ, behavioral) and extrinsic factors (e.g., stressor,
environmental exposures, and host–pathogen interactions) (15–
18). Recently, attention has been placed on neuroimmune circuits
produced through neuroendocrine and neuroendocrine receptor
expression by immune cell populations. Immune cells such as macrophages/monocytes, dendritic cells, NK cells, neutrophils, T cells,
and B cells express receptors for several neuroendocrine factors
such as glucocorticoid, substance P, CRH, and catecholamines
(norepinephrine and epinephrine) (19–23). Thus, it is postulated
that the heterogeneity of receptor expression by immune cells are
primary determinants of immune function.
The glucocorticoid response has been shown to play an essential
role in regulation of immune function and in turn impact health
and disease. Most commonly is the known pharmacological benefit
of its use in control of inflammatory responses. Insight into the
role of glucocorticoids as regulators of immune function was demonstrated in early studies where overstimulation of the HPA was
shown to be immunosuppressive, leading to susceptibility to infection (24, 25). Regulation of glucocorticoid responses on immune

80

H.P. Jones

function is controlled by glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) expressed
by immune cells. The glucocorticoid intracellular receptor system
represents two receptors, the GR and the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). Cortisol (Corticosterone in rodents) has the greatest
affinity for the GR receptor, which is the dominant receptor
expressed by immune cells (26, 27). Upon ligation, the inactivated
GR found in the cytoplasm is translocated into the nucleus where
it binds glucocorticoid response elements (GREs). Once in the
nucleus, the GR homodimer regulates the transcription of key
gene transcription factors including AP-1 and NFκB. NFκB in particular is a major factor involved in the regulation of cytokine
responses (28, 29). GR regulation of NFκB acts as a repressor and
in this manner is believed that downstream NFκB sequestration by
GR-mediated IκB (second messenger) activity in the cytoplasm
inhibits NFκB translocation into the nucleus and therefore alters
cytokine gene expression (30). Other competing points of view
have suggested that interactions between NFκB and GR are not
exclusive for suppression of cytokine responses but rather may be
dependent on the cell-type (31).
GRs are expressed on various cell types comprising the innate
and adaptive arms of the immune system (32). In general, glucocorticoids suppress all aspects of an immune response including
cellular trafficking (33), apoptosis (34, 35), maturation, and proliferation (36) among other specialized functions (e.g., adhesion,
cytokine production, antigenic recognition, antigen presentation)
(37). Such global suppression is mediated largely by glucocorticoid’s inhibition of the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines
IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α, and chemotactic factors (38) as well as reductions in elastase, oxidative stress, and other inflammatory mediators (39). At the same time however, glucocorticoids promote the
induction of the anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10 and TGF-β
(40, 70). This suggests a diversity of responses by GR-mediated
responses that may indicate specialization of function based on the
cellular phenotype. Macrophages/monocytes for example, which
play a critical role in innate and activation of the adaptive arm of
the immune response, are highly sensitive to GR-mediated
responses (40, 41). Importantly, due to the identification of various inflammatory and anti-inflammatory phenotypes, recent evidence supports a role in GR-mediated responses in shaping immune
function’s response against pathogens (42, 43). Likewise, neutrophils, which play a key role in early innate immune responses against
bacterial pathogens express GRs and are important targets in controlling neutrophilic inflammatory responses (44). In general,
GR-mediated responses have been shown to decrease the up-regulation of neutrophil-associated adhesion and chemotactic receptor
expression (45, 46). Thus, limiting the transmigration of neutrophils to sites of inflammation. Moreover, GR-mediated responses
on neutrophils have been shown to delay apoptosis resulting in a

4

Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying…

81

shift to the necrotic phenotype (47). These opposing outcomes
resulting from GR activation in macrophage and neutrophils as
well other innate immune cell populations remains unresolved and
poses a complex picture under circumstances in understanding the
induction and resolution of innate inflammatory responses.
Glucocorticoid responses also impact the development of
acquired immunity. Dendritic cells, for example, which serve as professional antigen presenting cells and critical stimulators of antigenspecific T cell responses express GRs (48, 49). Conventionally, prior
to maturation (during recognition and uptake of antigen), immature DCs respond positively to GR activity, resulting in their expansion and migration to lymph nodes necessary for their interaction
with naïve T cells. Mature DCs on the other hand respond negatively to GR activation. Previous studies have demonstrated a down
regulation in the expression of surface maturation co-stimulatory
molecules including MHC II, CD80, and CD40, which are required
for cognate ligation with naïve T cells co-receptors for their differentiation and activation (50). Emerging evidence, however, suggests a different perspective of GR-mediated responses on DCs.
Recent studies suggest that GR activity does not solely suppress of
DC maturation, but may dictate the functional phenotype. Roca
et al., demonstrated that GC exposure of DC results in the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-10 and suppression
of IL-12 reminiscent of a tolerogenic phenotype (51). T cells and B
cells also express GRs. In particular, GRs expressed on T cells have
been shown to play a pivotal role during T cell development in thymus (52). Based on glucocorticoid levels in thymus, studies have
demonstrated the extent of T cell survival (53, 54). In addition, GR
expression by T cells is an important determinant of T cell differentiation. TCR signaling is modulated by GR activity (52). Importantly,
T cell cytokine production as determinants of T cell differentiation
is significantly influenced by GR responsiveness. Preferences in
cytokine production are significantly affected by GR activity. IFN-γ
production is suppressed through GR activity by the repression of
Tbet/STAT signaling pathways (55, 56). In fact, preferences in a
loss of Th1-differentiation due to GR activity has been thought to
explain the polarization of Th2 and Th17 responses associated with
certain disease immunopathological diseases (e.g., allergic and autoimmune) (57, 58). Further investigation demonstrating the diversity of GR-mediated molecular signaling that causes preferences in
T cell cytokine production will greatly advance our understanding
of T cell-mediated disease pathologies.
3.2. Sympathetic
Neurotransmitter
Receptor-Mediation
of Immune Function

The SNS is mediated by two major neurotransmitters, epinephrine
and norepinephrine, which are synthesized from the amino acid,
tyrosine, and released from the synaptic end of SNS. Innervation
of SNS is found in several tissues, including blood vessels, liver,
kidney, intestines, lung, heart, and brain (12, 59). Major immune

82

H.P. Jones

organs such as lymph node, bone marrow, and spleen also have
SNS innervations (60). Expression of adrenergic receptor subtypes
has been detected on several immune cell populations including
NK cells, Th1 cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells (61–65).
Thus, it is believed that immune cells derive their functional properties in part by catecholaminergic neurotransmitter responses.
The adrenergic receptors, which mediate the functional effects of
these neurotransmitters are included in the GPCR (G protein-coupled receptor) family, and, therefore, their biological effect is mediated
by coupling with different G-protein-associated signaling. Adrenergic
receptors are subdivided into nine isotypes; three alpha-1 types
(α1A, α1B and α1C), three alpha-2 types (α2A, α2B and α2C), and
three beta-types (β1, β2 and β3).
Among all of the adrenergic receptors, β2 expression by T cells
has received most attention. In particular, β2 adrenergic receptor
expression and binding to epinephrine and norepinephrine results
in decreased IFN-γ production by Th1 type helper T cells whereas
no effects are discerned in Th2 type cells, because of the absence of
receptor expression (66). In support, Panine-Bordignon et al.
showed β2 agonists prevents Th1 development by selective inhibition of IL-12 by antigen presenting cells, while promoting Th2
cell phenotype (67). Because IL-12 is typically a cytokine expressed
by dendritic cells and macrophages, it is of interests to investigate
adrenergic-mediated responses in regulation of APC-T cell interactions. Norepinephrine is rapidly oxidized and turned into epinephrine. In this regard, our recent published studies demonstrated
that preferences in β2 adrenergic receptor activation by DC result
in a preferential Th17 phenotype (68). Further studies, which
examine adrenergic receptor-specific responses to elicit distinct cellular immune function, will be important in fully defining the role
of adrenergic responses in the setting of inflammatory disease.
3.3. ParasympatheticReceptor-Mediated
Immune Responses

The PNS is critical in maintaining physiological homeostasis to all
major organs of the hosts including heart, lung, and gut. This is
also true for controlling immune responses. While the sympathetic
arm of the ANS is typically excitatory in nature, the primary role of
the vagal system is thought to counterbalance SNS output as well
as limit the activation of the CNS in the midst of ongoing
inflammatory signals. For example, during acute infection, the HPA
axis responds to elevations in inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β
and IL-6 provoking sickness-like behaviors. Importantly, through
vagal stimulation the HPA is signaled allowing for an appropriate
response to the infection (69). Likewise the efferent arm of the
vagus is an essential deactivator of inflammatory responses (14). As
mentioned above Ach is a key PNS neurotransmitter that can relay
instruction directly to immune cells by Ach receptors (14). In particular, the alpha-7 (α7) nicotinic receptor is expressed on various
immune cell populations such as macrophages (70). Studies have

4

Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying…

83

shown that α7 signaling results in the reduction in pro-inflammatory
cytokine production (TNF-α, IL-β, IL-6) (70–72). In a similar
manner as to CRs, Ach-mediated suppression of pro-inflammatory
cytokine production has been found to be a result of repression of
NFκB phosphorylation (72) as well as α7-mediated inhibition of
the STAT3 pathways in immune cells (73). Although, studies have
implicated Ach-mediated suppression of pro-inflammatory
responses, equally relevant is the potential for the existence of feedback mechanisms in which α7 activation support the induction of
anti-inflammatory cytokine expression such as IL-10 and TGF-β.
Such studies would be helpful in targeting such pathways to attenuate conditions in certain chronic inflammatory conditions by promoting anti-inflammatory cellular phenotype.
3.4. Peripheral
CorticotrophinReleasing Hormone:
An Emerging Neuronal
Pathway Affecting
Cellular Immune
Function

Corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH), also known as corticotropinreleasing factor (CRF), is a neuroendocrine factor composed of
41-amino acids (74). CRH was originally known as a stress-induced
factor produced in PVN of the hypothalamus that triggers production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in pituitary, and
consequently, induces production of glucocorticoids. Two receptor isotypes (CRHR1 and CRHR2) have been reported to mediate
its biological effects, which belong to the GPCR superfamily (75).
In addition to its production and location in the CNS, CRH and
its receptors have been identified in several other sites such as placenta, fetal membranes, and spleen (76–78). Recent evidences in
our own research have demonstrated CRH and CRH receptors
expressed by immune cells to play a pivotal role as determinants of
disease outcome (79). In particular, several immune cell types such
as mast cells, peripheral blood monocytes, macrophage, and lymphocytes including Th2 cells have been identified as a potential
target of CRH (80, 81). Interestingly, CRH-mediated enhancement of immunological responses corresponding with specific
receptor expression has been reported. Agelaki et al. showed that
CRH stimulation induces pro-inflammatory cytokine production
in the macrophage cell line RAW264.7. In this study, they also
showed that LPS-induced systemic shock was suppressed by administration of CRHR1 antagonist (82). These findings implicate that
free CRH released from the location of its production has direct
effects on immune responses separate from HPA axis. In support,
several ectopic production of CRH from extra hypothalamic
tissues such as placenta and T cells has been reported (81, 83).
In addition, Kalantaridou et al., also showed that embryonic trophoblast and maternal decidual cells produce CRH (76). This
peripheral CRH plays crucial roles in implantation, as well as in the
anti-rejection process that protects the fetus from the maternal
immune system, primarily through apoptotic effects on activated T
cells. Thus, peripheral CRH may have an influence on several biological activities associated with immune responses and therefore

84

H.P. Jones

provide a potential mechanism for homeostatic maintenance
against stress-induced immune disorders. In this regard, recent
studies utilizing CRH receptor-specific antagonists have demonstrated quality of inflammatory responses based on preferences in
CRH-receptor activity (84–86). Our unpublished results also highlight the significance of CRH receptor expression in manipulation
macrophage and dendritic cell functions. Together, these and other
studies point to alternative roles for a CNS-derived neuroendocrine factor in orchestrating immune function.

4. Conclusion
Much of what we understand regarding the relationships between
nervous and immune system functioning stem from early studies
describing the effects of adverse stress and disease susceptibility
(87, 88). For example, under conditions of acute stress, immune
responses were characterized as hyper-responsive. On the contrary,
instances of chronic stress were typically deemed immunosuppressive. Consequently, the specificity of immune function was characterized based on preferences in neuroendocrine output. Interests
in these effects became the emphasis in defining determinants of
disease. To date, susceptibility to viral infection, bacterial infections, and cancer has been associated with neuroendocrine-mediated suppression of immune function. In contrast, the propensity
of inflammatory responses associated with asthma, rheumatoid
arthritis, and colitis has been linked to elevations in the SNS pathways. This dichotomy between neuro-immune responses poses
much complexity and specificity in neuro-immune functioning.
Neuroendocrine control of immunity at the level of individual
immune cell types raises interesting questions of neural and immune
circuits that protect the host from deleterious outcomes. Knowledge
of newly identified neuroendocrine receptor expression by innate and
adaptive immune cells and consequently its downstream function will
provide a new understanding of the bi-directional pathways which
exist between the nervous and immune systems. An increased understanding will ultimately provide potential avenues for therapies.
References
1. Steinman L (2004) Elaborate interactions
between the immune and nervous systems. Nat
Immunol 5:575–581
2. Dantzer R et al (1998) Cytokines and sickness
behavior. Ann N Y Acad Sci 840:586–590
3. Dantzer R et al (2000) Neural and humoral
pathways of communication from the immune
system to the brain: parallel or convergent?
Auton Neurosci 85:60–65

4. Watkins LR et al (1995) Cytokine-to-brain
communication: a review and analysis of alternative mechanisms. Life Sci 57:1101–1126
5. Hopkins SJ, Rothwell NJ (1995) Cytokines
and the nervous system I. Expression and recognition. Trends Neurosci 18:83–88
6. Barnes PJ (1998) Anti-inflammatory actions of
glucocorticoids: molecular mechanisms. Clin
Sci 94:557–572

4

Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying…

7. Kunicka JE et al (1993) Immunosuppression
by glucocorticoids: inhibition of production of
multiple lymphokines by in vivo administration
of dexamethasone. Cell Immunol 149:39–49
8. Elenkov IJ et al (2000) The sympathetic
nerve—an integrative interface between two
supersystems: the brain and the immune system. Pharmacol Rev 52:595–638
9. Nance DM, Sanders VM (2001) Autonomic
innervation and regulation of the immune system (1987–2007). Pharmacol Rev 53:487–525
10. Horin T et al (1995) The autonomic nervous
system as a communication channel between
the brain and the immune system.
Neuroimmunomodulation 2:203–215
11. Hadden JW et al (1970) Lymphocyte blast
transformation. I. Demonstration of adrenergic
receptors in human peripheral lymphocytes.
Cell Immunol 1:583–595
12. Felten DL, Felten SY (1988) Sympathetic
noradrenergic innervation of immune organs.
Brain Behav Immun 2:293–300
13. Elenkov IJ, Wilder RL, Chrousos GP, Vizi ES
(2000) The sympathetic nerve—an integrative
interface between two supersystems: the brain
and the immune system. Pharmacol Rev 52:
595–638
14. Westerloo DJ (2010) The vagal immune reflex:
a blessing from above. Wien Med Wochenschr
160:112–117
15. Steinman L et al (2003) The intricate interplay
among body weight, stress, and the immune
response to friend or foe. J Clin Invest
111:183–185
16. Wilder RL et al (1982) Strain and sex variation
in the susceptibility to streptococcal cell wallinduced polyarthritis in the rat. Arthritis Rheum
25:1064–1072
17. Rozlog LA et al (1999) Stress and immunity:
implications of viral disease and wound healing.
J Periodontol 70:786–792
18. Glaser R, Liecolt-Glaser JK (1998) Stressassociated immune modulation: relevance to
viral infections and chronic fatique syndrome.
Am J Med 105:35S–42S
19. Argon A, Stanisz AM (1992) Are lymphocytes
a target for substance P modulation in arthritis?
Semin Arthritis Rheum 21:252–258
20. Webster EL et al (1990) Corticotropin-releasing
factor receptors in mouse spleen: identification
of receptor-bearing cells as resident macrophages. Endocrinology 27:440–452
21. Nance DM, Sanders VM (2007) Autonomic
innervation and regulation of the immune system. Pharmacol Rev 53:487–525
22. Kohm AP, Sanders VM (2008) Norepinephrine
and beta 2-adrenergic receptor stimulation reg-

85

ulate CD4+ T and B lymphocyte function
in vitro and in vivo. Acta Biophys Sin (Shanghai)
40:595–600
23. Tompson EB (2008) Stepping stones in the
path of glucocorticoid-driven apoptosis of lymphoid cells. Steroids 73:1025–1029
24. Elmquist JK, Scammell TE, Saper CB (1997)
Mechanisms of CNS response to systemic
immune challenge: the febrile response. Trends
Neurosci 20:565–570
25. Mulla A, Buckingham JC (1999) Regulation of
the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis by
cytokines. Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab 13:503–521
26. Dharbhar FS, McEwen BS, Spencer RL (1993)
Stress response, adrenal steroid receptor levels
and corticosteroid-binding globulin levels—a
comparison between Spraque-Dawley, Fischer
344 and Lewis rats. Brain Res 616:89–98
27. Smith CC et al (1994) Differential mineral corticoid (type 1) and glucocorticoid (type 2)
receptor expression in Lewis and Fischer rats.
Neuroimmunomodulation 1:66–73
28. McKay L, Cidlowshki JA (1999) Molecular
control of immune/inflammatory responses:
interactions between nuclear factor-kB and steroid receptor-signaling pathways. Endocr Rev
20:435–459
29. Van der Burg B et al (1997) Nuclear factor-k B
repression in antiinflammation an immunosuppression by glucocorticoids. Trends Endocrinol
Metab 8:152–157
30. Brogan IJ et al (1999) Interaction of glucocorticoid receptor isoforms with transcription factors AP-1 and NF-kB: lack of effect of
glucocorticoid receptor B. Mol Cell Endocrinol
157:95–104
31. Pearce
D,
Yamamoto
K
(1993)
Mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptor
activities distinguished by nonreceptor factors
at a composite response element. Science
259:1161–1165
32. Plaut M (1987) Lymphocyte hormone receptors. Annu Rev Immunol 5:621–669
33. Pitzalis C, Piitone N, Perretti M (2002)
Regulation of leukocyte-endothelial interactions by glucocorticoids. Ann N Y Acad Sci
966:108–118
34. Tamada K et al (1998) IL-4-producing NK1.1+
T cells are resistance to glucocorticoid-induced
apoptosis: implications for the Th1/Th2 balance. J Immunol 161:1239–1247
35. Planey S, Litwack G (2000) Glucocorticoidinduced apoptosis in lymphocyte. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun 279:307–312
36. Alamai WY, Melemedjian OK (2002) Molecular
mechanisms of glucocorticoid antiproliferative

86

H.P. Jones

effects: antagonism of transcription factor
activity by glucocorticoid receptor. J Leukoc
Biol 71:9–15
37. Steer JH et al (1998) Altered leucocytes
trafficking and suppressed tumour necrosis factor a release from peripheral blood monocytes
after intraarticular glucocorticoid treatment.
Ann Rheum Dis 57:732–737
38. Wingett D, Forcier K, Nielson CP (1996)
Glucocorticoid
mediated
inhibition
of
RANTES expression in human T lymphocytes.
FEBS Lett 398:308–311
39. Barnes PJ (2010) Mechanisms and resistance
in glucocorticoid control of inflammation.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 120:76–85
40. Liberman AC et al (2007) Glucocorticoids in
the regulation of transcription factors that control cytokine synthesis. Cytokine Growth
Factor Rev 18:45–56
41. Russo-Marie F (1992) Macrophages and the
glucocorticoids. J Neuroimmunol 40:281–286
42. Tait AS, Butts CL, Sternberg EM (2008) The
role of glucocorticoids and progestins in
inflammatory, autoimmune, and infectious disease. J Leukoc Biol 84:924–931
43. Schif-Zuck S et al (2011) Saturated-efferocytosis
generates proresolving CD11b low macrophages: modulation by resolvins and glucocorticoids. Eur J Immunol 41:336–379
44. Goulding NK et al (1998) Novel pathways for
glucocorticoid effects on neutrophils in chronic
inflammation. Inflamm Res 47:S158–S165
45. Strausbaugh HJ, Rosen SD (1998) A potential
role for annexin 1 as a physiologic mediator of
glucocorticoid-induced L-selectin shedding
from myeloid cells. J Immunol 166:294–300
46. Kontula K et al (1983) Binding of progestins
to the glucocorticoid receptor. Correlation to
their glucocorticoid-like effects on in vitro
functions of human mononuclear leukocytes.
Biochem Pharmacol 32:1511–1518
47. McColl A et al (2007) Effects of glucocorticoids on apoptosis and clearance of apoptotic
cells. ScientificWorldJournal 17:1165–1181
48. Ashwell JD, Lu FWM, Ms V (2000)
Glucocorticoids in T cell development and
function. Annu Rev Immunol 18:309–345
49. Zen M et al (2011) The kaleidoscope of glucocorticoid effects on immune system.
Autoimmun Rev 10:305–310
50. Moser M et al (1995) Glucocorticoids downregulate dendritic cell function in vitro and
in vivo. Eur J Immunol 10:2818–2824
51. Roca L et al (2007) Dexamethasone modulates
interleukin-12 production by inducing monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in human dendritic cells. Immunol Cell Biol 8:610–616

52. Vacchio MS, Lee JJ, Ashwell JD (1999)
Thymus-derived glucocorticoids set the thresholds for thymocyte selection by inhibiting
TCR-mediated thymocyte activation. J Immunol
163:1327–1333
53. Palinkas L et al (2008) Developmental shift in
TcR-mediated rescue of thymocytes from glucocorticoid-induced apoptosis. Immunobiology 213:39–50
54. Purton JF et al (2004) Expression of the glucocorticoid receptor from the 1A promoter correlates with T lymphocyte sensitivity to
glucocorticoid-induced cell death. J Immunol
173:3816–3824
55. Takeda T et al (2008) Crosstalk between the
interleukin-6 (IL-6)-JAK-STAT and the glucocorticoid-nuclear receptor pathway: synergistic
activation of IL-6 response element by IL-6
and glucocorticoid. J Endocrinol 159:
323–330
56. Adcock IM (2001) Glucocorticoid-regulated
transcription factors. Pulm Pharmacol Ther
14:211–219
57. Van Oosten MJ et al (2010) Polymorphisms n
the glucocorticoid receptor gene that modulate
glucocorticoid sensitivity are associated with
rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Res Ther
12:R159
58. Vazquez-Tello A et al (2010) Induction of glucocorticoid receptor-beta expression in epithelial
cells of asthmatic airways by T-helper type 17
cytokines. Clin Exp Allergy 40(9):1312–1322
59. Belinger DL et al (2008) Sympathetic modulation of immunity: relevance to disease. Cell
Immunol 2:27–56
60. Nance DM, Sanders VM (2007) Autonomic
innervation and regulation of the immune system (1987–2007). Brain Behav Immun 21:
736–745
61. Madden KS, Sanders VM, Felten DL (1995)
Catecholamine influences and sympathetic
neural modulation of immune responsiveness.
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 35:417–448
62. Logan RW, Ariona A, Sarkar DK (2011) Role
of sympathetic nervous system in the entrainment of circadian natural-killer cell function.
Brain Behav Immun 25:101–109
63. Woods JA (2000) Exercised and neuroendocrine modulation of macrophage function. Int
J Sports Med 21:S24–S30
64. Maestroni GJ (2006) Sympathetic nervous system influence on the innate immune response.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1069:195–207
65. Shahabi S et al (2006) Sympathetic nervous
system plays an important role in the relationship between immune mediated diseases. Med
Hypotheses 67:900–903

4

Immune Cells Listen to What Stress Is Saying…

66. Sanders VM et al (1997) Differential expression of
the beta-2-adrenergic receptor by Th1 and Th2
clones: implications for cytokine production and
B cell help. J Immunol 158:4200–4210
67. Panine-Bordignon P et al (1997) Beta2agonists prevent Th1 development by selective
inhibition of interleukin 12. J Clin Invest
100:1513–1519
68. Kim BJ, Jones HP (2010) Epinephrine-primed
murine bone marrow-derived dendritic cells
facilitate production of IL-17A and IL-4 but
not IFN-g by CD4+ T cells. Brain Behav
Immun 24:1126–1136
69. Borovikova LV et al (2000) Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory
response to endotoxin. Nature 405:458–462
70. Sato KZ et al (1999) Diversity of mRNA
expression for muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes and neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits in human mononuclear
leukocytes and leukemic cell lines. Neurosci
Lett 266:17–20
71. Borovikova LV et al (2000) Role of vagus nerve
signaling in CNI-1493-mediated suppression
of acute inflammation. Auton Neurosci
85:141–147
72. Yoshikawa H et al (2006) Nicotine inhibits the
production of proinflammatory mediators in
human monocytes by suppression of I-kappaB
phosphorylation and nuclear factor-kappaB
transcriptional activity through nicotinic acetylcholine receptor alpha7. Clin Exp Immunol
146:116–123
73. de Jonge WJ, van der Zanden EP (2005)
Stimulation of the vagus nerve attenuates macrophage activation by activating the Jak2- STAT3
signaling pathway. Nat Immunol 6:844–851
74. Vale W et al (1981) Characterization of a
41-residue ovine hypothalamic peptide that
stimulates secretion of corticotropin and betaendorphin. Science 213:1394–1397
75. Chen R et al (1993) Expression cloning of a
human corticotropin-releasing-factor receptor.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90:8967–8971
76. Kalantaridou S et al (2007) Peripheral corticotropin-releasing hormone is produced in the
immune and reproductive systems: actions,
potential roles and clinical implications. Front
Biosci 12:572–580
77. Tache Y, Kiank C, Stengel A (2009) A role for
corticotropin-releasing factor in functional gastrointestinal disorders. Curr Gastroenterol Rep
11:270–277

87

78. Slominski A et al (2001) Cutaneous expression
of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH),
urocortin, and CRH receptors. FASEB J
15:1678–1693
79. Gonzales XF et al (2008) Stress-induced differences in primary and secondary resistance
against bacterial sepsis corresponds with diverse
corticotropin releasing hormone receptor
expression by pulmonary CD11c+ MHC II+
and CD11c-MHC II+ APCs. Brain Behav
Immun 22:552–564
80. Cao J et al (2005) Human mast cells express
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) receptors and CRH leads to selective secretion of
vascular endothelial growth factor. J Immunol
174:7665–7675
81. Webster EL et al (1990) Corticotropinreleasing factor receptors in mouse spleen:
identification of receptor-bearing cells as resident macrophages. Endocrinology 127:
440–452
82. Agelaki S et al (2002) Corticotropin-releasing
hormone augments proinflammatory cytokine
production from macrophages in vitro and in
lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxin shock in
mice. Infect Immun 70:6068–6074
83. Wallon C, Soderholm JD (2009) Corticotropinreleasing hormone and mast cells in the regulation of mucosal barrier function in the human
colon. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1165:206–210
84. Gao L et al (2007) Corticotropin-releasing
hormone receptor type 1 and type 2 mediate
differential effects on 15-hydroxy prostaglandin dehydrogenase expression in cultured
human chorion trophoblasts. Endocrinology
148:3645–3654
85. Kokkotou E et al (2006) Corticotropinreleasing hormone receptor 2-deficient mice
have reduced intestinal inflammatory responses.
J Immunol 177:3355–3361
86. Moffatt JD, Lever R, Page CP (2006) Activation
of corticotropin-releasing factor receptor-2
causes bronchorelaxation and inhibits pulmonary inflammation in mice. FASEB J
20:1877–1879
87. Watkins LR, Maier SF (2005) Immune regulation of central nervous system functions: from
sickness responses to pathological pain. J Intern
Med 257:139–155
88. Vedhara K et al (1999) Chronic stress in elderly
carers of dementia patients and antibody
response to influenza vaccination. Lancet 353:
627–631

Chapter 5
Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood:
Insight into Immunological Mechanisms
Mark Hamer, Romano Endrighi, and Lydia Poole
Abstract
Psychosocial factors, such as chronic mental stress and mood, are recognized as an important predictor of
longevity and wellbeing. In particular, depression is independently associated with cardiovascular disease
and all-cause mortality, and is often comorbid with chronic diseases that can worsen their associated health
outcomes. Regular exercise is thought to be associated with stress reduction and better mood, which may
partly mediate associations between depression, stress, and health outcomes. The underlying mechanisms
for the positive effects of exercise on wellbeing remain poorly understood. In this overview we examine
epidemiological evidence for an association between physical activity and mental health. We then describe
the exercise withdrawal paradigm as an experimental protocol to study mechanisms linking exercise, mood,
and stress. In particular we will discuss the potential role of the inflammatory response as a central
mechanism.
Key words: Exercise withdrawal, Mental stress, Mood, Physical activity, Inflammation,
Psychophysiology, Wellbeing

1. Introduction
Mental illness is now recognized as a serious health risk, and
accounts for approximately 14% of the global burden of disease.
Depression, one of the most common mental disorders, ranks
fourth among the leading causes of disability adjusted life years
worldwide (1). Prospective studies have demonstrated that clinical
and sub-clinical depression in initially healthy individuals relates to
greater risk of future cardiovascular disease (CVD), diabetes, and
mortality (2, 3). Depressive symptoms appear to be a risk factor for
mortality following myocardial infarction (4) and in patients with
coronary heart disease (5). In our recent meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies (6), depression also predicted a 29% increase in
cancer incidence and an 8% reduction in cancer survival. In addition,

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_5, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

89

90

M. Hamer et al.

observational data from 60 countries has demonstrated that
depression produces the greatest decrement in health compared
with other chronic diseases, and the comorbid state of depression
incrementally worsens health compared with depression alone (7).
Extensive epidemiological evidence has also demonstrated an
association between chronic stress exposure and long-term health
outcomes such as death and clinical CVD events. For example,
chronic work stress, caregiver burden, hostility, loneliness, and
poor social networks are all related to a greater risk of future CVD
and mortality in initially healthy individuals (8–11). Conversely,
evidence is beginning to emerge to show that positive psychosocial
characteristics such as positive affect and wellbeing are associated
with beneficial health outcomes (12). Psychosocial factors may
therefore exert their effect on mental and physical health through
similar behavioral and physiological mechanisms, but at present
these mechanisms are not completely understood.
Depression and stress-related disorders have various modes of
treatment, including pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, and lifestyle
or behavioral modification. However, evidence shows that pharmacotherapy is only effective in about one third of patients and some
only have a partial response to treatment (13), prompting the need
to identify other forms of treatment. Instead, more recently physical exercise has received a significant amount of attention with
regards to stress reduction and improving mood. In this chapter we
will present an overview of the evidence linking physical activity
with stress reduction and mood, with particular attention on mechanisms. We will present evidence from several types of study design,
including; (1) observational epidemiological cohort studies that
follow large samples of the population over time; and (2) experimental studies that manipulate behaviors such as physical activity, or
administer acute stressors in controlled laboratory settings.

2. Physical Activity,
Stress, and Mood
The epidemiological cohort studies performed in this area are
generally designed to assess the exposure variable (e.g., physical
activity) at baseline and track various outcome measures (e.g., a
measure of depressive symptoms) through follow-up so that
changes over time can be examined. In a recent meta-analysis, we
systematically retrieved 13 prospective cohort epidemiological
studies (14–26) that examined the association between physical
activity and risk of future depression. The total sample size consisted of 73,487 participants who were healthy and not clinically
depressed at the baseline assessment. Three of the cohorts consisted
of women only, three consisted of men only, and the remaining
seven cohorts were of mixed gender. The follow-up period ranged

5

Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood…

91

from 2 to 25 years (mean average, 9.2 years). Physical activity was
assessed through self-report measures and incident depression
was measured from a variety of methods, including a physician diagnosis or the administration of different validated psychometric
tools, such as the Centre for Epidemiologic Studies for Depression
Scale. The pooled odds ratio (OR) of depression in the physically
active compared with the sedentary was 0.78 (95% CI, 0.71–0.86,
P < 0.001), which suggests the active have a 22% reduced risk of
developing depressive symptoms. There was significant heterogeneity, c2 (15) = 47.06, P < 0.001, although the results of Begg’s
asymmetry test suggested that publication bias was unlikely
(P > 0.10). Figure 1 displays the effect sizes from all of the included
studies. Interestingly, the protective effects of physical activity
appeared to be stronger in women (OR = 0.69, 0.60–0.79,
P < 0.001) than in men (OR = 0.81, 0.66–0.99, P = 0.045), and this
is noteworthy since women generally report more psychological
distress and depression. The gender effect largely explained the
high level of heterogeneity found in the overall results. It should
be noted that wherever possible, odds ratios were extracted from

Fig. 1. Forest plot that displays effect sizes from epidemiological studies on physical activity and risk of depressive symptoms.

92

M. Hamer et al.

multivariate models with the most complete adjustment for
potential confounders, which importantly demonstrates that
physical activity seems to be independently associated with risk of
depression. The studies included in our analyses incorporated a
number of potential confounders including social class, education,
employment, marital status, smoking, and alcohol intake. Several
studies also employed additional controls for chronic illnesses,
physical disability, and stressful life events.
A major weakness of this area, however, is the reliance on selfreported physical activity. This is a limitation because mental health
might cause reporting bias and some symptoms of mental illness
might have conceptual overlap with physical activity behavior. For
example, individuals with more depressive symptoms may underor over-report the frequency of their physical activity or sedentary
time. Furthermore, self-reported activity and sedentary time is
somewhat arbitrary and imprecise as there is controversy at present
as to how to differentiate between different exercise intensities
e.g., light, moderate, vigorous (27). Physical activity can be assessed
objectively using accelerometers, which are devices that measure
body movements in terms of acceleration, which can then be used
to estimate the intensity of physical activity over time. Most accelerometers are piezoelectric sensors that detect acceleration in one
to three orthogonal planes (anteroposterior, mediolateral, and
vertical). Very few studies have examined associations between objectively assessed physical activity and mental health, and those that
have revealed inconsistent findings. For example, in a small cohort
of elderly Japanese participants, physical activity was assessed
objectively over 1 year, and inverse associations of activity with
depression and stressful life events were observed (28, 29). In a
small study of 32 non-psychiatric individuals, there was an inverse
relationship between depressive symptoms and physical activity
recorded over 5 days of accelerometry, with those performing the
lowest levels of physical activity being at greatest risk of depressive
symptoms (30). Similarly, in a sample of 73 students seeking help
from a counseling service, depression was found to be negatively
associated with daytime physical activity as assessed using 2-week
accelerometry recordings (31). However, more recent evidence
has not supported these findings, with results from 105 nonpsychiatric participants showing no relationship between physical
activity measured using accelerometers and depressed mood (32).
The largest study to date by Janney et al. (33) used data from the
NHANES 2003–2004 cohort of US non-institutionalized civilians,
to investigate the use of mental health services and its association with
physical activity as measured using accelerometers. Results showed
that male users were significantly less active than non-users although
no association was found for women. We have recently conducted
several studies in this area. The first was a cross-sectional study in a
representative sample of 921 English adults, which demonstrated

5

Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood…

93

Fig. 2. The association between physical activity and (a) daily positive mood; (b) depressive mood measured from the Centre
for Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-D) scale. Physical activity groups are based on average daily activity recorded
by accelerometry (light bars, £213.88 min/day; grey bars, 213.89–262.33 min/day; black bars, ³262.34 min/day).

an association between objectively measured physical activity and
self-rated health, although not with symptoms of psychological
distress (34). In this study participants reporting very good health
recorded, on average, 7 min/day (95% CI, 1–12 min/day,
P = 0.019) more moderate to vigorous activity compared with
participants reporting fair–poor health. In a second study we examined the association between objectively measured habitual physical activity levels and daily mood in women (35). Participants wore
an accelerometer device during waking hours for 1 week, and in
addition recorded their daily moods. We observed robust associations between objectively assessed physical activity and more positive daily mood, which is displayed in Fig. 2 where physical activity
groups reflect tertile of average daily minutes active recorded by
accelerometry.
In addition to these discrepancies, it is not yet clear whether
exercise intensity or duration is the key factor for determining mental health benefits. For example, epidemiological evidence using
self-reported physical activity has suggested that the mental health
benefits are positive regardless of the intensity of the activity (36).
However, in a cohort of elderly Japanese participants, only the
duration of objectively assessed moderate intensity activity was
inversely associated with depressive symptoms (29). Evidence from
randomized controlled trials also suggests greater effects on positive mood in participants undertaking moderate intensity exercise
compared with vigorous (37), and in relation to symptoms of
fatigue more favorable effects have been observed for light intensity
activity (38). Taken together, the reason for the inconsistent findings
might be attributable to different cut-off points adopted when
interpreting data from accelerometers and thus the development of
definitive guidelines tackling these issues are required. In addition,
accelerometer devices are limited in that they cannot be worn for all

94

M. Hamer et al.

activities such as swimming and contact sports, and defining
“non-wear” time can therefore be problematic. In summary, selfreport and objective measures both have their advantages and an
optimal method is to combine both approaches. Taken together,
however, the evidence suggests regular exercise is associated with
higher positive and lower negative mood symptoms.

3. Physical Activity,
Depressive
Symptoms, and
Inflammation

The immune system may play an important role in psychobiological
processes that link psychosocial stress with CVD and other health
outcomes (39, 40). In particular, there has been much interest in
the association between depressive symptoms and inflammatory
risk markers (41). Several studies have reported elevated concentrations of various inflammatory markers in differing populations
reporting depressive symptoms, including the medically healthy
(42, 43), elderly (44–46), and patients with acute coronary symptoms or existing CVD risk factors (39, 47, 48). Indeed, we recently
hypothesized that inflammation may be one of the causal mechanisms by which depression manifests itself in acute coronary syndrome patients (49). Experimental work from our laboratory has
also demonstrated a link between inflammation and mood. Using
a vaccination model to induce a mild inflammatory challenge,
greater increases in negative mood were observed after vaccine
compared with placebo among 30 healthy male volunteers (50). In
addition, negative changes in mood following vaccination were
significantly correlated with increases in interleukin (IL)-6 production. Notably, no significant symptoms of nausea were reported, so
it cannot be argued that negative mood arose because the participants were feeling ill.
A large amount of interest has also focused on the potential
anti-inflammatory effects of exercise. It has been argued that the
increases in circulating IL-6 that are observed after an acute bout
of exercise promote an anti-inflammatory environment by increasing
IL-1 receptor antagonist and IL-10 synthesis, while inhibiting
pro-inflammatory markers such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-a) (51). The cytokines released during exercise are thought
to originate from exercising skeletal muscle, which work in a hormonelike fashion exerting specific endocrine effects on various organs
and signaling pathways (52). Unlike IL-6 release during acute
mental stress, which appears to be dependent on activation of the
NFkB signaling pathway (53), intramuscular IL-6 expression is
regulated by a network of signaling cascades that are likely to
involve the CA2+/NFAT and glycogen/p38 MAPK pathways. This
might partly explain why exercise-induced IL-6 release is not
acting as a strong pro-inflammatory agent. This hypothesis might
also explain why a large number of observational studies have

5

Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood…

95

demonstrated an inverse association between regular physical
activity and various pro-inflammatory markers in humans (54). Results
from exercise trials have not always consistently found reductions
in inflammatory markers following intervention although some of
these findings are confounded by issues such as changes in fat mass
that are an important source of inflammatory cytokine production
(55). Indeed, increasing interest has focused on mechanisms by
which exercise reduces visceral white adipose tissue inflammation,
including reduced adipocyte size, increased blood flow, increased
mitochondrial function and facilitated fatty acid oxidation,
decreased cellular stress, and/or improved resistance to cell stress.
Given the described link between both mood and exercise with
inflammatory pathways, it is feasible to hypothesize that better
mental wellbeing experienced by regular exercisers might be partly
explained by an underlying inflammatory mechanism. We conducted a study in a sample of 3,609 older adults from The English
Longitudinal Study of Ageing, to examine if the association
between persistent depressive symptoms and inflammatory markers
over 2 years follow-up could be partly explained by physical activity
behavior. Participants with recurrent elevated depressive symptomatology at both time points displayed significantly elevated levels of
C-reactive protein (CRP) and fibrinogen at follow-up compared to
non-depressed, and this relationship was partly explained through
lower levels of physical activity in participants with depressive
symptoms (56). The anti-inflammatory effects of exercise might
also be relevant at a neurobiological level, since alterations in
neurotransmitter function involving serotonin, norepinephrine,
and dopamine are known to induce depression and are targets for
currently available psychopharmacological treatments. Exercise is
thought to alter serotonin metabolism, release endogenous opioids, and increase central noradrenergic neurotransmission which
may all contribute to antidepressant and anxiolytic effects. The
dopaminergic system is thought to play a key role in depression,
and polymorphisms of the dopamine D2 receptor gene have also
been implicated in physical activity behavior (57). Further research
has focused on the hippocampus, where exercise-induced neurogenesis and growth factor expression have been proposed as potential mediators (58). An emerging theory is that exercise enhances
several growth factors, such as brain derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) and insulin like growth factor (IGF-1), which mediate the
protective and therapeutic effects of exercise on depression. It has
been shown that an acute bout of exercise increases peripheral levels
of serum BDNF in an exercise intensity dependent fashion, but
resting levels of BDNF does not seem to be affected by long-term
exercise training (59) suggesting that other compensatory mechanisms might be at play. There is also evidence to suggest that the
pro-inflammatory cytokines impair some of the growth factor
signaling pathways in the brain (60), thus anti-inflammatory
actions of exercise may again be important.

96

M. Hamer et al.

Another important aspect may be the interaction of the immune
system with the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis and
autonomic nervous system. Following mental stress, the sensitivity
of the immune system to dexamethasone inhibition (a synthetic
version of the hormone cortisol that has potent anti-inflammatory
properties) is reduced, as manifest by a reduction in this hormone’s
capacity to suppress the production of inflammatory cytokines
(61). In endurance trained individuals, however, an acute bout of
exercise has been shown to increase tissue sensitivity to glucocorticoids, which is thought to act as a mechanism to prevent an excessive muscle inflammatory reaction (62). HPA axis dysregulation
and cortisol hyper-secretion has been implicated in mental health
and some studies have shown lower stress-induced cortisol
responses in physically trained individuals compared to the
untrained (63, 64) suggesting that physical activity may act as a
buffer against exaggerated or sustained stress responses.
Nevertheless, we have failed to replicate these findings in our work
that examined associations between objectively assessed physical
activity levels and cortisol responses to acute mental stress (35).
However, the association of the cortisol diurnal rhythm with
physical activity behavior has not been investigated and further
work is required in this area.
Previous research has indicated an intriguing link between
efferent cholinergic activity of the vagus nerve (the parasympathetic arm of the autonomic nervous system) and inhibition of
inflammatory processes (65). We have previously shown that physically fitter individuals maintained greater parasympathetic control
during mental stress and also demonstrated lower inflammatory
stress responses (66). The decline in parasympathetic control with
aging is attenuated with regular exercise training (67), thus it is
feasible that fitness-related improvements in parasympathetic
activity could play a role in mediating the inhibition of stressinduced inflammatory processes.
In summary there is a link between physical activity and mood,
and several physiological response systems have been implicated
including the inflammatory, dopaminergic, and neuroendocrine
systems. However, there is a lack of experimental and longitudinal
evidence to show the long-term health consequences of the effect
of physical activity on these biological pathways.

4. The Exercise
Withdrawal
Paradigm

Experimental trials of exercise training in patients and healthy
volunteers have been effective in treating depressive symptoms
with effect sizes ranging from 1.03 to 0.58, respectively (68).
There appears to be substantial individual variation in responses,

5

Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood…

97

and the effect sizes vary depending on intervention duration, exercise
type, bout duration, and intensity. Exercise training trials are costly
and require a large amount of manpower in administering supervised exercise sessions. Additionally, one of the difficulties in interpreting data from short-term (often 8–12 weeks) exercise trials is
that individual changes in fitness are usually modest, which suggests
a short period of exercise training may not be sufficient to induce
the type of chronic adaptations required to observe stress buffering
effects. The exercise withdrawal paradigm therefore represents a
useful, more practical alternative since mood disturbances can be
elicited in habitual exercisers after 1–2 weeks withdrawal from their
regular training activities, which provides a model to investigate
the links between exercise, mood, and the underlying biology. We
and others have hypothesized that mood disturbances caused by
withdrawal from regular exercise might act as a mild inflammatory
stimulus. However, recent studies have been unable to confirm this
hypothesis. Several studies, including one of our own that have
successfully induced an increased negative mood following several
weeks of exercise withdrawal, did not find any changes in a range
of inflammatory markers, such as IL-6, CRP, TNF-a, fibrinogen,
and soluble intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (69, 70). Similarly, 1
week withdrawal from exercise in highly active men did not elicit
any substantial changes in CRP, IL-6, TNF-a, and circulating
leukocyte concentration (71). In the same study, no changes in
inflammatory markers were observed among sedentary participants
who undertook 30 min of brisk walking each day for 1 week.
Healthy men that reduced their daily step count by 85% for 2 weeks
developed impaired glucose tolerance, attenuation of postprandial
lipid metabolism, and a 7% increase in intra-abdominal fat mass,
although plasma cytokines and muscular expression of TNF was
not altered (72). However, another study reported that reduced
parasympathetic nervous activity as measured by heart rate variability was predictive of negative mood following exercise withdrawal (73). These findings are consistent with emerging data on
underlying molecular mechanisms. For example, the expression of
exercise-regulated muscle genes, such as the transcriptional coactivator PGC1a, that is thought to promote anti-inflammatory
effects (74), is known to be rapidly induced after a single bout of
acute exercise although quickly reverts back to basal levels. In contrast to the transient changes following acute exercise, greater
levels of PGC1a are present in chronically trained exercised muscle
than in untrained. Thus, there is a clear difference between shortterm and long-term adaptations, which might explain why a short
2 week exercise withdrawal period in trained participants is
insufficient to see changes. Furthermore, adherence to exercise
withdrawal in regular, fit exercisers may be problematic because
habitually active individuals are less likely to agree to stop their
activity regime and perhaps compensate in some other ways to

98

M. Hamer et al.

maintain a physically active lifestyle (e.g., taking up active commuting
for the period of exercise withdrawal), which might influence
the results.
In a further study we investigated the impact of exercise withdrawal on psychophysiological responses to mental stress because
this method can sometimes detect differences that might not
otherwise be seen under resting conditions. Indeed, although
acute psychophysiological responses are not clinically meaningful
in themselves, they represent the way in which individuals respond
to daily stressors in their normal lives and if elicited regularly might
have clinical relevance. Although the effects of cytokines are often
thought to be transient, they may provoke a time-dependent
sensitization so that the response to a later cytokine or stressor
stimulus is enhanced, resulting in an increased vulnerability to
depressed mood (75). We experimentally manipulated physical
activity levels by asking a group of habitual exercisers to withdraw
from their regular training for 2 weeks (76). The adherence to
exercise withdrawal was mixed, as indicated by objective accelerometry physical activity records, but in participants with greater
mood disturbances (assessed using the 28 item General Health
Questionnaire) following 2 weeks withdrawal we observed
significantly higher inflammatory responses to mental stress compared to those with low or no mood disturbance. These findings
are presented in Fig. 3, which shows that participants in the highest tertile of mood disturbance demonstrated the greatest
inflammatory responses to mental stress after statistical adjustments for age, gender, body mass index, and pre-intervention
inflammatory stress response. In the same study, cortisol responses

Fig. 3. The association between mood disturbance following 2 weeks exercise withdrawal
and IL-6 responses to mental stress. Participants were 41 healthy men and women regularly engaged in exercise. Mood disturbance was assessed using the 28 item General
Health questionnaire. Data are presented as mean ± SEM, adjusted for age, gender, body
mass index, and pre-intervention inflammatory stress response.

5

Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood…

99

to mental stress were higher in the exercise withdrawal phase compared
to control period with a significant difference emerging at 20 min
post-stress. These results, although preliminary, suggest that
inflammatory and neuroendocrine factors may in part mediate the
protective or buffering effect of physical activity on stress-related
physiological activation.
To summarize, the exercise withdrawal paradigm offers a
promising way in which to elucidate some of the causal pathways
linking physical activity to stress and mood. Future work is needed
to better understand the temporal relationship between exerciseinduced mood disturbances and changes in inflammatory and
neuroendocrine factors.

5. Summary
Regular physical activity is associated with better mental health and
wellbeing. The methodologies used to investigate this area include
observational population studies and smaller laboratory-based
experimental work. In this article we have highlighted the exercise
withdrawal paradigm as an experimental protocol to study mechanisms linking exercise, mood, and the underlying biology. We have
presented some preliminary evidence to suggest that psychobiological responses to exercise, including adaptations to the immune
system, HPA axis, and autonomic nervous system, might partly
facilitate the links between physical activity and wellbeing.

Acknowledgements
The authors are supported by grant funding from the British Heart
Foundation (UK).
References
1. Insel TR, Charney DS (2003) Research on
major depression. JAMA 289:3167–3168
2. Kuper H, Marmot M, Hemingway H (2002)
Systematic review of prospective cohort studies
of psychosocial factors in the etiology and
prognosis of coronary heart disease. Semin
Vasc Med 2:267–314
3. Knol MJ, Twisk JW, Beekman AT, Heine RJ,
Snoek FJ, Pouwer F (2006) Depression as a risk
factor for the onset of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
A meta-analysis. Diabetologia 49:837–845
4. van Melle JP, de Jonge P, Spijkerman TA,
Tijssen JG, Ormel J, van Veldhuisen DJ, van

den Brink RH, van den Berg MP (2004)
Prognostic association of depression following
myocardial infarction with mortality and cardiovascular events: a meta-analysis. Psychosom
Med 66:814–822
5. Barth J, Schumacher M, Herrmann-Lingen C
(2004) Depression as a risk factor for mortality
in patients with coronary heart disease: a metaanalysis. Psychosom Med 66:802–813
6. Chida Y, Hamer H, Wardle J, Steptoe A (2008)
Do psychosocial stress-related factors contribute to cancer incidence and survival? Nat Clin
Pract Oncol 5:466–475

100

M. Hamer et al.

7. Moussavi S, Chatterji S, Verdes E, Tandon A,
Patel V, Ustun B (2007) Depression, chronic
diseases, and decrements in health: results from
the World Health Surveys. Lancet 370:
851–858
8. Heffner KL, Waring ME, Roberts MB, Eaton
CB, Gramling R (2011) Social isolation,
C-reactive protein, and coronary heart disease
mortality among community-dwelling adults.
Soc Sci Med 72:1482–1488
9. Kivimäki M, Virtanen M, Elovainio M,
Kouvonen A, Väänänen A, Vahtera J (2006)
Work stress in the etiology of coronary heart
disease–a meta-analysis. Scand J Work Environ
Health 32:431–442
10. Chida Y, Steptoe A (2009) The association of
anger and hostility with future coronary heart
disease: a meta-analytic review of prospective
evidence. J Am Coll Cardiol 53:936–946
11. Schulz R, Beach SR (1999) Caregiving as a risk
factor for mortality: the Caregiver Health
Effects Study. JAMA 282:2215–2219
12. Pressman SD, Cohen S (2005) Does positive
affect influence health? Psychol Bull 131:
925–971
13. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR,
Nierenberg AA, Warden D, Ritz L, Norquist
G, Howland RH, Lebowitz B, McGrath PJ,
Shores-Wilson K, Biggs MM, Balasubramani
GK, Fava M, STAR*D Study Team (2006)
Evaluation of outcomes with citalopram for
depression using measurement-based care in
STAR*D: implications for clinical practice. Am
J Psychiatry 163:28–40
14. Wiles NJ, Haase AM, Gallacher J, Lawlor DA,
Lewis G (2007) Physical activity and common
mental disorder: results from the Caerphilly
study. Am J Epidemiol 165:946–954
15. Wise LA, Adams-Campbell LL, Palmer JR,
Rosenberg L (2006) Leisure time physical
activity in relation to depressive symptoms in
the Black Women’s Health Study. Ann Behav
Med 32:68–76
16. Brown WJ, Ford JH, Burton NW, Marshall
AL, Dobson AJ (2005) Prospective study of
physical activity and depressive symptoms in
middle-aged women. Am J Prev Med 29:
265–272
17. Backmand H, Kaprio J, Kujala U, Sarna S
(2003) Influence of physical activity on depression and anxiety of former elite athletes. Int J
Sports Med 24:609–619
18. van Gool CH, Kempen GI, Penninx BW, Deeg
DJ, Beekman AT, van Eijk JT (2003)
Relationship between changes in depressive
symptoms and unhealthy lifestyles in late middle aged and older persons: results from the

Longitudinal Aging Study Amsterdam. Age
Ageing 32:81–87
19. Strawbridge WJ, Deleger S, Roberts RE,
Kaplan GA (2002) Physical activity reduces the
risk of subsequent depression for older adults.
Am J Epidemiol 156:328–334
20. Wyshak G (2001) Women’s college physical
activity and self-reports of physician-diagnosed
depression and of current symptoms of psychiatric distress. J Womens Health Gend Based
Med 10:363–370
21. Morgan K, Bath PA (1998) Customary physical activity and psychological wellbeing: a longitudinal study. Age Ageing 27(suppl
3):35–40
22. Cooper-Patrick L, Ford DE, Mead LA, Chang
PP, Klag MJ (1997) Exercise and depression in
midlife: a prospective study. Am J Public Health
87:670–673
23. Paffenbarger RS Jr, Lee IM, Leung R (1994)
Physical activity and personal characteristics
associated with depression and suicide in
American college men. Acta Psychiatr Scand
Suppl 377:16–22
24. Weyerer S (1992) Physical inactivity and
depression in the community. Evidence from
the Upper Bavarian Field Study. Int J Sports
Med 13:492–496
25. Camacho TC, Roberts RE, Lazarus NB, Kaplan
GA, Cohen RD (1991) Physical activity and
depression: evidence from the Alameda County
Study. Am J Epidemiol 134:220–231
26. Farmer ME, Locke BZ, Moscicki EK,
Dannenberg AL, Larson DB, Radloff LS
(1988) Physical activity and depressive symptoms: the NHANES I Epidemiologic Follow-up
Study. Am J Epidemiol 128:1340–1351
27. Pate RR, O’Neill JR, Lobelo F (2008) The
evolving definition of “Sedentary”. Exerc Sport
Sci Rev 36:173–178
28. Yoshiuchi K, Inada S, Nakahara R, Akabayashi
A, Park H, Park S, Shephard RJ (2010) Stressful
life events and habitual physical activity in older
adults: 1-year accelerometer data from the
Nakanojo Study. Ment Health Phys Act
3:23–25
29. Yoshiuchi K, Nakahara R, Kumano H, Kuboki
T, Togo F, Watanabe E, Yasunaga A (2006)
Yearlong physical activity and depressive symptoms in older Japanese adults: cross-sectional
data from the Nakanojo study. Am J Geriatr
Psychiatry 14:621–624
30. Mendlowicz MV, Jean-Louis G, von Gizycki
H, Zizi F, Nunes J (1999) Actigraphic predictors of depressed mood in a cohort of nonpsychiatric adults. Aust N Z J Psychiatry
33:553–558

5

Physical Activity, Stress Reduction, and Mood…

31. Barkley TJ, Tryon WW (1995) Psychomotor
retardation found in college students seeking
counseling. Behav Res Ther 33:977–984
32. Kawada T, Katsumata M, Suzuki H, Shimizu T
(2007) Actigraphic predictors of the depressive
state in students with no psychiatric disorders.
J Affect Disord 98:117–120
33. Janney CA, Richardson CR, Holleman RG,
Glasheen C, Strath SJ, Conroy MB, Kriska AM
(2008) Gender, mental health service use and
objectively measured physical activity: Data
from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES 2003–2004).
Ment Health Phys Act 1:9–16
34. Hamer M, Stamatakis E (2010) Objectively
assessed physical activity, fitness and subjective
wellbeing. Ment Health Phys Act 3:67–71
35. Poole L, Steptoe A, Wawrzyniak AJ, Bostock S,
Mitchell ES, Hamer M (2011) Associations of
objectively measured physical activity with daily
mood ratings and psychophysiological stress
responses in women. Psychophysiology 48:
1165–1172
36. Asztalos M, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Cardon G
(2010) The relationship between physical activity and mental health varies across activity
intensity levels and dimensions of mental health
among women and men. Public Health Nutr
13:1207–1214
37. Moses J, Steptoe A, Mathews A, Edwards S
(1989) The effects of exercise training on mental well-being in the normal population: a controlled trial. J Psychosom Res 33:47–61
38. Puetz TW, Flowers SS, O’Connor PJ (2008) A
randomized controlled trial of the effect of
aerobic exercise training on feelings of energy
and fatigue in sedentary young adults with persistent fatigue. Psychother Psychosom 77:
167–174
39. Vaccarino V, Johnson BD, Sheps DS, Reis SE,
Kelsey SF, Bittner V, Rutledge T, Shaw LJ,
Sopko G, Bairey Merz CN, National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (2007) Depression,
inflammation, and incident cardiovascular disease in women with suspected coronary ischemia: the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute-sponsored WISE study. J Am Coll
Cardiol 50:2044–2050
40. Hamer M, Molloy GJ, Stamatakis E (2008)
Psychological distress as a risk factor for CVD
events: pathophysiological and behavioral
mechanisms. J Am Coll Cardiol 52:
2156–2162
41. Irwin MR, Miller AH (2007) Depressive disorders and immunity: 20 years of progress and
discovery. Brain Behav Immun 21:374–383

101

42. Liukkonen T, Silvennoinen-Kassinen S,
Jokelainen J, Räsänen P, Leinonen M, MeyerRochow VB, Timonen M (2006) The association between C-reactive protein levels and
depression: results from the northern Finland
1966 birth cohort study. Biol Psychiatry
60:825–830
43. Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Chrysohoou C,
Tsetsekou E, Papageorgiou C, Christodoulou
G, Stefanadis C, ATTICA Study (2004)
Inflammation, coagulation, and depressive
symptomatology in cardiovascular disease-free
people; the ATTICA study. Eur Heart J 25:
492–499
44. Kop WJ, Gottdiener JS, Tangen CM, Fried LP,
McBurnie MA, Walston J, Newman A, Hirsch
C, Tracy RP (2002) Inflammation and coagulation factors in persons >65 years of age with
symptoms of depression but without evidence
of myocardial ischemia. Am J Cardiol
89:419–424
45. Penninx BW, Kritchevsky SB, Yaffe K, Newman
AB, Simonsick EM, Rubin S, Ferrucci L, Harris
T, Pahor M (2003) Inflammatory markers and
depressed mood in older persons: results from
the Health, Aging and Body Composition
study. Biol Psychiatry 54:566–572
46. Bremmer MA, Beekman AT, Deeg DJ, Penninx
BW, Dik MG, Hack CE, Hoogendijk WJ
(2008) Inflammatory markers in late-life
depression: results from a population-based
study. J Affect Disord 106:249–255
47. Empana JP, Sykes DH, Luc G, Juhan-Vague I,
Arveiler D, Ferrieres J, PRIME Study Group
(2005) Contributions of depressive mood and
circulating inflammatory markers to coronary
heart disease in healthy European men: the
Prospective
Epidemiological
Study
of
Myocardial Infarction (PRIME). Circulation
111:2299–2305
48. Pizzi C, Manzoli L, Mancini S, Costa GM
(2008) Analysis of potential predictors of
depression among coronary heart disease risk
factors including heart rate variability, markers
of inflammation, and endothelial function. Eur
Heart J 29:1110–1117
49. Poole L, Dickens C, Steptoe A (2011) The
puzzle of depression and acute coronary syndrome: reviewing the role of acute inflammation.
J Psychosom Res 71:61–68
50. Wright CE, Strike PC, Brydon L, Steptoe A
(2005) Acute inflammation and negative mood:
mediation by cytokine activation. Brain Behav
Immun 19:345–350
51. Febbraio MA, Pedersen BK (2002) Musclederived interleukin-6: mechanisms for activa-

102

M. Hamer et al.

tion and possible biological roles. FASEB J
16:1335–1347
52. Pedersen BK (2011) Exercise-induced myokines and their role in chronic diseases. Brain
Behav Immun 25:811–816
53. Bierhaus A, Wolf J, Andrassy M, Rohleder N,
Humpert PM, Petrov D, Ferstl R, von Eynatten
M, Wendt T, Rudofsky G, Joswig M, Morcos M,
Schwaninger M, McEwen B, Kirschbaum C,
Nawroth PP (2003) A mechanism converting
psychosocial stress into mononuclear cell activation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:1920–1925
54. Hamer M (2007) The relative influences of
fitness and fatness on inflammatory factors.
Prev Med 44:3–11
55. Hamer
M,
O’Donovan
G
(2010)
Cardiorespiratory fitness and metabolic risk
factors in obesity. Curr Opin Lipidol 21:1–7
56. Hamer M, Molloy GJ, de Oliveira C,
Demakakos P (2009) Persistent depressive
symptomatology and inflammation: to what
extent do health behaviours and weight control
mediate this relationship? Brain Behav Immun
23:413–418
57. Simonen RL, Rankinen T, Perusse L, Leon AS,
Skinner JS, Wilmore JH, Rao DC, Bouchard C
(2003) A dopamine D2 receptor gene polymorphism and physical activity in two family
studies. Physiol Behav 78:751–757
58. Cotman CW, Berchtold NC, Christie LA
(2007) Exercise builds brain health: key roles
of growth factor cascades and inflammation.
Trends Neurosci 30:464–472
59. Knaepen K, Goekint M, Heyman EM, Meeusen
R (2010) Neuroplasticity—exercise-induced
response of peripheral brain-derived neurotrophic
factor: a systematic review of experimental studies in human subjects. Sports Med 40:765–801
60. Tong L, Balazs R, Soiampornkul R, Thangnipon
W, Cotman CW (2008) Interleukin-1beta
impairs brain derived neurotrophic factorinduced signal transduction. Neurobiol Aging
29:1380–1393
61. Rohleder N, Schommer NC, Hellhammer DH,
Engel R, Kirschbaum C (2001) Sex differences
in glucocorticoid sensitivity of proinflammatory
cytokine production after psychosocial stress.
Psychosom Med 63:966–972
62. Duclos M, Gouarne C, Bonnemaison D (2003)
Acute and chronic effects of exercise on tissue
sensitivity to glucocorticoids. J Appl Physiol
94:869–875
63. Rimmele U, Seiler R, Marti B, Wirtz PH,
Ehlert U, Heinrichs M (2009) The level of

physical activity affects adrenal and cardiovascular reactivity to psychosocial stress.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 34:190–198
64. Traustadóttir T, Bosch PR, Matt KS (2005)
The HPA axis response to stress in women:
effects
of
aging
and
fitness.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 30:392–402
65. Tracey KJ (2002) The inflammatory reflex.
Nature 420:853–859
66. Hamer M, Steptoe A (2007) Association
between physical fitness, parasympathetic control, and proinflammatory responses to mental
stress. Psychosom Med 69:660–666
67. Carter JB, Banister EW, Blaber AP (2003)
Effect of endurance exercise on autonomic
control of heart rate. Sports Med 33:33–46
68. Rethorst CD, Wipfli BM, Landers DM (2009)
The antidepressive effects of exercise: a metaanalysis of randomized trials. Sports Med
39:491–511
69. Poole L, Hamer M, Wawrzyniak AJ, Steptoe A
(2011) The effects of exercise withdrawal on
mood and inflammatory cytokine responses in
humans. Stress 14:439–447
70. Kop WJ, Weinstein AA, Deuster PA, Whittaker
KS, Tracy RP (2008) Inflammatory markers
and negative mood symptoms following exercise withdrawal. Brain Behav Immun 22:
1190–1196
71. Lund AJ, Hurst TL, Tyrrell RM, Thompson D
(2011) Markers of chronic inflammation with
short-term changes in physical activity. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 43:578–583
72. Krogh-Madsen R, Thyfault JP, Broholm C,
Mortensen OH, Olsen RH, Mounier R,
Plomgaard P, van Hall G, Booth FW, Pedersen
BK (2010) A 2-wk reduction of ambulatory
activity attenuates peripheral insulin sensitivity.
J Appl Physiol 108:1034–1040
73. Weinstein AA, Deuster PA, Kop WJ (2007)
Heart rate variability as a predictor of negative mood symptoms induced by exercise
withdrawal.
Med
Sci
Sports
Exerc
39:735–741
74. Handschin C, Spiegelman BM (2008) The role
of exercise and PGC1alpha in inflammation
and chronic disease. Nature 454:463–469
75. Anisman H, Merali Z (2003) Cytokines, stress
and depressive illness: brain-immune interactions. Ann Med 35:2–11
76. Endrighi R, Steptoe A, Hamer M (2011) Mood
disturbance following exercise withdrawal is
associated with greater inflammatory responses
to stress. Psychosom Med 73:A110

Part II
Translation of Psychoneuroimmunology
into Personalized Medicine: Potential Biomarkers
and Clinical Implications

Chapter 6
Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers
and Cytokine Networks in Psychoneuroimmunology
Qing Yan
Abstract
Developments in psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) need to be translated into personalized medicine to
achieve better clinical outcomes. One of the most critical steps in this translational process is to identify
systemic biomarkers for better diagnosis and treatment. Applications of systems biology approaches in PNI
would enable the insights into the correlations among various systems and different levels for the
identification of the basic elements of the psychophysiological framework. Among the potential PNI biomarkers, inflammatory markers deserve special attention as they play a pivotal role linking various health
conditions and disorders. The elucidation of inflammatory markers, cytokine networks, and immunebrain-behavior interactions may help establish PNI profiles for the identification of potential targets for
personalized interventions in at risk populations. The understanding of the general systemic pathways
among different disorders may contribute to the transition from the disease-centered medicine to patientcentered medicine. Integrative strategies targeting these factors and pathways would be useful for the
prevention and treatment of a spectrum of diseases that share the common links. Examples of the translational implications of potential PNI biomarkers and networks in diseases including depression, Alzheimer’s
disease, obesity, cardiovascular disease, stroke, and HIV are discussed in details.
Key words: Alzheimer’s disease, Biomarkers, Cytokines, Depression, Inflammation, Obesity,
Pathways, Personalized medicine, Psychoneuroimmunology, Systems biology

1. The Role of
Psychoneuroimmunology
Biomarkers
in Personalized
Medicine

Developments in psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) need to be
translated into personalized medicine to achieve better clinical outcomes. One of the most critical steps in this translational process is
to identify systemic biomarkers for better diagnosis and treatment.
Biomarkers are objectively detected indicators of biomedical states
(1). Biomarkers have great potentials for improving disease diagnosis, treatment selection, and prevention of side effects. Predictive
and prognostic biomarkers for characterizing different subsets of
patients have been used for outcome prediction and assessment in

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_6, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

105

106

Q. Yan

a variety of diseases, such as cancer, cardiovascular diseases, respiratory
diseases, rheumatoid arthritis, and neurological diseases (1).
Useful biomarkers should include the systems interactions and
networks for the patient group profiling that are pathophysiologically similar (2). Discovery of biomarkers based on systems biology
approaches may help understand multi-level factors and multidirectional interactions among psychological factors, the nervous
system, the immune system, and the endocrine system ((2), also
see Chapter 1). Insights into these interactions and the systems
models would enable integrative prevention and therapeutic methods designed specifically for patient subgroups to reach the goals of
personalized medicine.
These multi-level factors should include psychological and
behavioral features such as emotional distress, and systemic physiological features such as immunological or neurological alterations
(2). The connection of such factors with ultimate health conditions
and disorders makes them appropriate candidate markers to be
placed into the integrative frameworks for further personalized analysis (see Chapter 1). Although currently it is still hard to apply
immune markers as biomarkers or diagnostic markers in the clinic,
this rapidly developing field may make great contributions to the
practice of personalized medicine. For instance, up to now the pathobiology of most psychiatric disorders is still unclear, with inaccurate
diagnosis and empirical treatments that need improvement. The
identification of biomarkers has been suggested to help achieve more
precise diagnoses and better treatments in these disorders (3).
Among the potential PNI biomarkers, inflammatory markers
deserve special attention as they play a pivotal role linking various
health conditions and disorders including depression, obesity, cancer, and cardiovascular diseases (2). In fact, inflammation has been
suggested as one of the best models for the translational purposes
in personalized medicine (4). Patients with chronic diseases often
have a high rate of inflammatory symptoms such as pain, sleep disorders, fatigue, as well as cognitive and mood changes. On the other
hand, biobehavioral elements influence circulating inflammatory
markers directly (5). The systemic profiling of inflammatory markers
may have significant clinical implications for interventions to relieve
those symptoms (6).

2. Applying
Systems Biology
Approaches in the
Identification
of Psychoneuroimmunology
Biomarkers

Although genetic factors can be important biomarker candidates,
these factors cannot function alone but are influenced by the genegene and gene-environment interactions. Gene-environment interactions have significant impacts on the identification of patient
subgroups for personalized treatments in mood disorders (7).

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

107

Environmental factors such as epigenetic modifications and life
experiences may affect the pathophysiological results of genetic
susceptibility (see Chapter 2). These elements also include exposure types such as war trauma and time frames such as childhood
abuse ((7), also see Chapter 1). Considering these complex factors,
the integration of various types of information at different systems
levels, including genetic variations, cellular pathways, and environmental factors are necessary for better diagnosis and treatments
((8), also see Chapter 1). Systems biology approaches would enable
such integration.
Systems biology explores the interrelationships and networks
among biomedical factors at various systems levels for the understanding and therapy of diseases (9). Systems biology combines
mathematics and computational methods with empirical observations to be used for modeling multivariate networks for understanding complex systems ((9, 10), also see Chapter 20). Some
strategies of systems biology that have been used to model molecular networks include ordinary differential equations (ODE) and
general network models such as topological and statistical models
(10). The cutting-edge technologies such as the high throughput
methods may contribute to the finding of potential biomarkers by
screening proteome mixtures at various disease states. A meaningful explanation of data from these methods requires investigation
at multiple systems levels. A systems biology approach will make
significant contributions to the interpretation of the behavior of
these biomarker candidates (3).
For example, although singular factors are important in the
pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders such as depression and anxiety, dysfunctional neural circuits and signaling pathways have been
suggested to play significant roles (11). A combination of multiple
genetic and environmental factors has been found to influence certain brain circuits in these disorders (12). Systemic profiling of the
diseases need to be based on large datasets from analyses at various
levels. These analyses should include gene expression and pathways
at the molecular and cellular levels, multiple brain regions at the
tissue/organ levels, and the transcriptome of a developmental
series of brains within the time dimension (13). Thus systemic and
multi-level analyses are needed for finding biomarkers and correlating genotypes with the disease phenotypes.
From the systems biology perspective, correlations among various systems need to be investigated for the identification of the
basic elements of the psychophysiological framework. The brain
and peripheral tissues including the cardiovascular and immune
systems communicate in a bidirectional or even multi-directional
approach, both “top-down and bottom-up” with autonomic and
neuroendocrine pathways involved (14). Certain fronto-temporal
cortical regions cooperate reciprocally with subcortical structures,
responsible for affective, hormonal, immune, and stress responses,

108

Q. Yan

as well as the status of homeostasis (14). Inflammatory markers
such as proinflammatory cytokines and signaling pathways can
serve as crucial indices of these networks. Exploration of such
structure-function connections between the mind and body may
contribute to effective therapies for many chronic diseases.
In fact, systemic pathways have been found to be more useful
as biomarkers than individual proteins for the transition from disease-centered medicine to preventive medicine (15). Many
immune pathways can influence the brain and behavior. Interacting
elements of the immune-brain interrelationships include the
cytokines such as nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and neurotransmitters such as serotonin and dopamine (16). Such interactions are
important in behavioral alterations such as anxiety, depression,
anorexia, fatigue, sleep impairment, and cognitive dysfunctions
(see Chapter 1). These immune-brain pathways can also affect
environmental and vulnerability factors including stress, aging,
and food intake (16). To discover personalized targets, it would
be necessary to understand these immune-brain-behavior interrelationships. Potential preventive and treatment strategies can be
designed by targeting these pathways of disorders among those at
risk populations (2).

3. Cytokine
Networks and
Systemic
Biomarkers

Cytokines enable the intercellular communication and transmit
signals in the immune system. To this date more than 100 human
cytokines have been identified (17). Cytokines form complex networks with multiple signaling pathways intersecting and influencing
each other. They have synergistic or antagonistic functions. These
molecules are involved in the bidirectional neural–immune interactions at various levels. Cytokine signals can be autocrine, i.e., the
same cell generates the cytokine and also responds to it; or paracrine, i.e., the cytokine is generated by one cell and have effects on
another (10). At the molecular level, cytokines and other molecules
such as neurotransmitters and neuropeptides enable the communications among the nervous, endocrine, and immune systems. At
the system level, neural–immune interactions have been associated
with emotionality (10).
Cytokines may affect cognition through diverse mechanisms,
such as by mediating bidirectional communications between the
central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral immune system, and involving in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)
axis activation in stress and depression (18). Proinflammatory

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

109

cytokines can communicate with a cytokine network in the brain
and influence the brain functions associated with behaviors
including neurotransmitter metabolism and neuroendocrine
functions. These functions are involved in the modulation of
mood, motivation, and alarm. Cytokine-mediated interactions
between neurons and glial cells are associated with inflammatory
mechanisms within the CNS in cognitive impairment (18). Such
impacts may lead to behavioral changes and neuropsychiatric
problems including anxiety, depression, anorexia, fatigue, cognitive dysfunction, and sleep disorders. For example, brain cytokines including interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-6 have been related
to various health conditions from food intake to anxiety-like
behaviors (4). Investigation in such inflammation related pathways has been suggested a high priority in psychiatric diseases,
because these pathways have played critical roles in diseases such
as mood disorders and schizophrenia (19).
Specifically, many molecules and pathways are involved in such
immune-brain interactions, such as NFκB, p38 mitogen activated
protein kinase (MAPK), and various cytokine signaling networks.
The relevant pathways also include those of indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) and kynurenine (KYN), the neurotransmitter pathways involving serotonin and dopamine, as well as neurocircuits
(16). These immune-brain pathways interact with factors at various
levels including chronic stress, aging, and obesity, and result in
neuropsychiatric disorders. Animal studies have shown that
proinflammatory pathways are involved in lower availability of
tryptophan (TRP), with elevated activity of IDO and higher levels
of KYN in the CNS (19). Changes in the KYN pathways have been
found important in psychiatric disorders. For example, such
changes may cause alterations of serotonin and other neurotransmitters and lead to depression (19).
In addition, the janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of
transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway downstream of cytokine receptors and growth factor receptors are involved in sending signals
from the cell surface to the nucleus (20). Cytokine signaling via
this pathway is essential for long-term memory and cellular
responses including cell survival, differentiation, and motility (21).
The JAK2/STAT pathway can be activated in the pericontusional
cortex and has been related to the neurological function recovery
following traumatic brain injury (TBI) (20). Understanding of
these pathways and networks may have profound clinical implications for better diagnosis and for the identification of systemic targets in preventive and translational medicine. The following
sections will discuss the roles of the inflammatory markers and networks in various diseases in details.

110

Q. Yan

4. Inflammatory
Markers, Cytokine
Networks, and
Psychoneuroimmunology
Profiles: Some
Examples
4.1. Depression

Knowledge integration of the PNI of depression may help with the
personalized treatment of depression and its medical comorbidities.
To achieve this goal in the heterogeneous groups of patients, the
differences in the immune profiles should be distinguished in addition to the profiles of symptoms and demographic elements (2).
For example, depression has been closely related to both immune
suppression and immune activation. The differentiation between
the markers of immune suppression and immune activation would
be needed for the discovery of individual differences (22).
Depressed patients often have altered cellular immunity such
as reduced natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity. These patients have
higher peripheral blood levels of immune activation markers including IL-6, IL-1, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interferon
(IFN)-α and γ, and C-reactive protein (CRP) (22–24). Elevations
of peripheral blood chemokines and cellular adhesion molecules, as
well as stress-induced NFκB have been found in patients with
major depression (25). These molecules can be potential biomarkers of increased inflammation in depression. On the other hand,
successful antidepressant treatments may help down-regulate the
inflammatory markers back to normal in depressed patients (26).
An association between inflammation and treatment resistance has
also been observed.
Such connections of the immunological markers have indicated
that immune malfunction may be a critical feature of depression
and the medical comorbidities. For example, acute and chronic
administrations of proinflammatory cytokines or cytokine inducers
have been found to induce depressive symptoms (24). Chronic
inflammation is also closely related to the pathophysiology of
immune suppression in disorders including cancer and rheumatoid
arthritis (23). Exploration of these immunoregulatory mechanisms
from large samples of patients with depression may help elucidate
the associations between immune suppression and immune activation (23). Investigations of such variations in immunologic disparity based on shared immune profiles may enable the understanding
of individual differences and characterization of the subgroups in
patients with depression and relevant diseases (23).
In addition, proinflammatory cytokines and relevant genetic
polymorphisms are critical in depression-related disorders and
behaviors. Polymorphisms in the IL-1β gene have been related to
treatment response and changes in emotional processing (25).
The endogenous opioid peptide beta-endorphin is involved in
the modulation of proinflammatory cytokine production via the
mu-opioid receptor-dependent pathways (27). Functional polymorphisms of the mu-opioid receptor gene (OPRM1, SNP:
A118G) have been found to influence circulating cytokines and

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

111

the health-related quality of life (QOL) (27). Exploration of such
functional influences of genetic polymorphisms will be meaningful for personalized medicine.
To be useful as therapeutic targets, protein biomarkers need to
be put back into the systemic pathways. Inflammatory and neurodegenerative pathways play essential roles in depression. For example, the stress-associated cytokines and oxidative brain damage have
impacts on the IDO pathway. Such alterations reduce the generation of TRP and serotonin (5-HT) (24). Specifically, chronic exposure to innate immune cytokines such as IFN-α may lead to the
altered activity of diurnal HPA axis and behavioral changes such as
depression in medically ill individuals (28). IFN-α may affect CNS
inflammatory pathways, neurotransmitter metabolism, and monoamine metabolism to form the pathway to depression. This protein
may induce metabolic enzymes such as IDO and cytokine signaling
pathways of p38 MAPK, and influence the production of 5-HT
(26). Dopamine depletion and the basal ganglia may also be
involved, because IFN-α can induce alterations in regional brain
activity and behavior such as fatigue (26). Activation of neural circuits such as the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex related to anxiety
and alarm may lead to cytokine-induced behavioral changes.
In another example, up-regulated production of IFN-γ in the
periphery systems and brain activates a merger of TRP-KYN and
guanine-tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) metabolic pathways (29).
Such changes may result in the inflammation cascade associated
with aging and aging-associated medical and psychiatric disorders
(AAMPD), including depression, anxiety, metabolic syndrome,
diabetes, and vascular cognitive impairment. IFN-γ-inducible
KYN/pteridines inflammation cascade is influenced by IFN-γ
(+874) T/A genotypes encoding cytokine productions (29). IFNγ-inducible cascade is also affected by environmental factors, such
as vitamin B6 deficiency, and by pharmacological agents. The elucidation of these mechanisms and pathways may provide new strategies for anti-aging and anti-AAMPD interventions.
The proinflammatory cytokines have been related to the onset
of the glucocorticoid resistance as well as the overdrive of the HPA
axis. Such inflammatory and neurodegenerative pathways are
involved in the brain damage in depression through reduced neurogenesis and elevated neurodegeneration (24). Stressors may
affect the neurotransmitter systems such as GABAergic and monoamine functioning (30). Such changes can limit neurogenesis,
cause the dysregulation of growth factors such as BDNF, and affect
cellular viability via NFκB and MAP kinase pathways. These processes are also associated with the comorbidity among depression
and neurological conditions, such as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s
diseases, as well as cardiovascular-related pathology (30). The
identification of these potential pathways and biomarkers will be
helpful for discovering the therapeutic targets for depression.

112

Q. Yan

These targets may include proinflammatory cytokines and their
receptors, IDO pathways, and neurotrophic factors (24).
The above examples also indicate that the identification of the
potential biomarkers of depression will facilitate the understanding
of a spectrum of disorders. For instance, depression and behavioral
changes are often observed among patients with the metabolic syndrome (MetS), with the possible involvement of chronic activation
of innate immunity. Inflammation may provide the link between
MetS and depressive symptoms such as neurovegetative, mood,
and affective-cognitive properties (31). Those with MetS may have
more depressive symptoms related to inflammatory biomarkers
including CRP and IL-6. In addition, peripheral blood high-sensitive
CRP (hsCRP) has been suggested to be used in the quantification
of inflammation based on the association of inflammation with diseases such as cardiovascular disease. Guidelines for using such factors may be helpful for the identification of subgroups among
depressed patients for immune-targeted therapies (25).
Another essential behavioral factor is sleep disorder. Blood concentrations of inflammatory factors have been correlated with the
severity of depressive symptoms such as sleep disorders, cognitive
dysfunction, and fatigue (25). Depressed patients with disordered
sleep have shown nocturnal elevated levels of inflammatory markers
IL-6 and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule (sICAM) (32).
Depression and inflammation are commonly seen in cancer
patients. Psychological interventions have been found effective in
relieving depression-related symptoms including pain and fatigue
(33). A randomized clinical trial among breast cancer patients
showed that such interventions also led to decreased levels of
inflammation markers including white blood cell count and neutrophil count. The study suggested that the effects on inflammation
could be mediated by relieving depressive symptoms (33).
Based on these understandings, cytokine antagonists have been
suggested to have antidepressant features. For example, the TNF-α
antagonist, etanercept has been found beneficial in relieving depressive symptoms and regulating rapid eye movement sleep in those
with alcohol dependence (34). Anti-inflammatory cytokines such
as IL-10 may inhibit the occurrence of depressive-like behavior
after exposure to inflammatory stimuli (25).
In addition to targeting cytokines directly, another potential
method for the treatment of depression is targeting inflammatory signaling pathways. For example, the inhibition of the p38 MAPK pathway was shown to reverse the process of behavioral changes in animal
studies (25). Such strategy is also helpful for the treatment of other
inflammatory disorders such as cardiovascular disease and pulmonary
diseases including asthma. By focusing on targeting the systemic
inflammation as the connection among various health conditions,
these strategies may also be helpful for changing the emphasis from
disease-focused medicine to human-centered medicine (4).

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

4.2. Alzheimer’s
Disease

113

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disease of
the brain. The brain is involved in complex peripheral immune
interactions, while inflammatory processes can profoundly influence
brain functions. Activation of innate immune mechanisms causes
increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines. Cytokines interact
with cholinergic and dopaminergic pathways, and mediate
inflammatory processes in neurodegenerative diseases such as AD
and vascular dementia (18). Peripheral or central cytokine dysregulation could influence cognition such as impaired sleep regulation, micronutrient deficiency caused by appetite suppression, and
many endocrine interactions. Peripheral cytokine dysregulation
may also be associated with cognitive aging (18). Such understanding may provide a new framework for elucidating the roles of
cytokines in neurodegenerative disorders such as AD. Antiinflammatory cytokine signaling may mediate molecular adjuvant
therapy of AD.
Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
AD. A study on the secretion pattern of monocytes in patients with
AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) showed higher levels of
cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, as well as a lower
competence of these cells responding to inflammatory challenges
(35). The study indicated that monocytes can be potential targets
for understanding the progression from MCI to AD.
Specifically, the cytokine IL-1β is an important component in
inflammatory pathways that may make neurons vulnerable to
degeneration (36). This cytokine may damage neurons by disturbing the PI3-K/Akt pathway-mediated protection by BDNF, as
well as the activations of Akt, MAPK/ERK, and CREB. The polymorphisms of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β also play a role
in AD. AD has been related to the TT genotype of IL-1β +3953
SNP, and a potential association with the −511 TT genotype (37).
The polymorphisms have been related to the pathogenic progress
of the brain and the cognitive decline. In addition, increased levels
of IL-18 were found in stimulated blood mononuclear cells from
AD patients having the CC genotype at the position −607 (38).
ICAM-1 can be found in astrocytes in CNS pathologies including
multiple sclerosis and AD (39). ICAM-1 ligation may activate
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) ERK1/ERK2 and p38
MAPKs, and induce mRNA expression of proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α (39).
On the other hand, expression of the IL-4 gene was found to
attenuate AD pathogenesis in mice models (40). Sustained expression
of IL-4 led to decreased astro/microgliosis, amyloid-beta peptide
(Abeta) oligomerization and deposition, and improved neurogenesis. Higher levels of IL-4 also improved spatial learning. Such
findings have suggested that neuronal anti-inflammatory cytokine
signaling can be used as a potential target for non-Abeta-mediated
treatment of AD (40).

114

Q. Yan

In addition, the elucidation of the multiple functions of IL-10
in the brain may enable a better understanding of neurodegenerative diseases and the development of novel interventions for major
debilitating diseases of the CNS (41). IL-10 is synthesized in the
CNS and is involved in limiting clinical symptoms of stroke, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, meningitis, and the behavioral
changes upon bacterial infections. Expression of IL-10 is increased
in many diseases in the CNS to improve survival of neurons and all
glial cells in the brain. This is done via inhibiting the pro-apoptotic
cytokines and stimulating cell survival signals. Stimulation of IL-10
receptors is associated with the regulation of many signaling pathways such as Jak1/Stat3, PI 3-kinase, MAPK, suppressor of
cytokine signaling (SOCS), and NFκB (41). Such changes may
improve cell survival by blocking ligand- and mitochondrialinduced apoptotic pathways. IL-10 also leads to anergy in braininfiltrating T cells via suppressing cell signaling by the co-stimulatory
CD28-CD80/86 pathway (41). Therefore, IL-10 may have antiinflammatory functions in the brain by limiting the production of
proinflammatory cytokines, inhibiting cytokine receptor expression, and blocking receptor activation.
Using systems biology approaches, several processes have been
found as molecular features of AD. These features include the
reduction of mitochondrial metabolism, higher production of reactive oxygen species and misfolded proteins, altered synaptic protein
machinery of transmission, tau hyperphosphorylation, and altered
ubiquitination (42). However, up to now no single growth factor
or cytokine has been confirmed as a biomarker for diagnosing AD
or dementia such as MCI. On the other hand, several growth factors
and/or cytokines/chemokines in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and
blood can be combined to form a “patient profile signature” for the
diagnosis of AD and MCI with high specificity (43). These potential biomarker profiles include growth factors such as epidermal
growth factor (EGF), and cytokines/chemokines such as IL-11,
CCL5 (RANTES), CCL15 (MIP1delta, macrophage inflammatory
protein-1delta, MIP5), and CCL18 (MIP4, macrophage
inflammatory protein-4 or PARC) (43).
4.3. Obesity

Obesity is featured with chronic low-grade inflammation, hyperleptinemia, and hypothalamic leptin resistance (44). Leptin is an
adipocyte-derived hormone involved in the regulation of food
intake and energy homeostasis. It can activate fatty acid oxidation,
insulin release, and peripheral insulin action. Leptin receptor is a
member of the class I cytokine receptor superfamily. Leptin
deficiency or resistance can lead to obesity, diabetes, and infertility.
Leptin signal transduction pathways are associated with peripheral
lipid metabolism through AMP-activated protein kinase and hepatic
stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 pathways (45). Leptin functions are

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

115

related to the regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K),
PTP-1B, and SOCS-3 (46). SOCS3 inhibits STAT3 pathway and
suppresses the PI3K pathway of leptin signaling in the hypothalamus (47). These interactions have been associated with the development of central leptin resistance and obesity.
Inflammatory markers play a critical role in emotional distress
and behavioral symptoms of obese individuals. Studies on the association between adiposity, inflammation, eating behavior, and
emotional status among obese women found that body mass index
(BMI) was positively related to inflammatory markers and adipokines such as leptin and adiponectin (48). These potential markers
including IL-6 and hsCRP are also connected to the depression
and anxiety aspects of neuroticism. On the other hand, gastric surgery could lead to significant weight loss, lower levels of
inflammatory markers especially hsCRP, lower levels of anxiety,
and progress in emotional status and eating behavior (48). These
results suggested strong correlations between adiposity,
inflammation, stress, and behavioral factors in obesity.
4.4. Cardiovascular
Disease and Stroke

Studies have found that those with depressive mood had increased
levels of inflammatory markers involved in coronary heart disease
(CHD) incidence, including IL-6, CRP, and ICAM-1 (49). Such
results confirmed the association between depressive mood and
CHD events. The cytokine granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF) binds to its receptor G-CSF-R and activates several signaling transduction pathways such as PI3K/Akt, Jak/Stat, and
MAP kinase (50). Such activation stimulates survival, proliferation,
differentiation, and mobilization of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. These mechanisms are involved in myocardial infarction, heart failure, and stroke (50).
Cytokines are crucial mediators of the inflammatory response
in stroke. Both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines
are generated in the ischemic brain. Anti-inflammatory cytokines
including IL-10 improve cell survival. However, proinflammatory
cytokines including TNF-α can lead to cell death (51). Cytokines
can interact with the JAK/STAT pathway, leading to changes associated with cell death or survival. Cerebral ischemia results in acute
inflammation and primary brain damage. Activation of the innate
immune system is involved in this inflammatory process, mediated
by proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1β and IL-6.
Generation of these cytokines is initiated by toll-like receptors
(TLRs) involved signaling pathways (52). Negative feedback suppression of TLRs and proinflammatory cytokine signaling pathways is associated with ischemic tolerance in the brain with a
protective mechanism.
Understanding of these mechanisms and pathways may contribute to the prevention and treatment of stroke and related diseases.

116

Q. Yan

These approaches may include anti-neutrophil, anti-ICAM-1, and
anti-proinflammatory cytokine strategies. Potential pathways
that can be targeted include transcriptional regulators of
inflammatory gene expression such as NF-κB and proteasome,
and signaling pathways such as ICE-cascade and MAPK/MKK/
ERK cascades that are related to inflammation and neuronal
cell death (53).
4.5. HIV

It would be interesting to investigate the role of the HPA axis and
the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) in biobehavioral effects on
HIV-1 pathogenesis and disease progression. Studies have indicated that HPA and SNS effector molecules may increase HIV-1
replication in cellular models through the influences on viral infectivity, viral gene expression, and the innate immune response to
infections (54). Regulation of leukocyte biology by neuroeffector
molecules may be involved in the mediation of how psychosocial
factors affect HIV-1 pathogenesis (54). Neural and endocrine
parameters have been found as potential and useful biomarkers for
evaluating the effects of behavioral interventions as novel strategies
for inhibiting HIV-1 disease progression (54).
HIV-1 exposure may trigger proinflammatory genes associated
with the JAK/STAT pathway in human brain microvascular
endothelial cells (HBMEC) (55). HIV-1 gp120 protein can stimulate STAT1 and activate IL-6 and IL-8 secretion in HBMEC. The
crosstalk between STAT1, mitogen activated protein kinase kinase
(MEK), and PI3K pathways may cause the dysfunction of the
blood–brain barrier (BBB). Suppression of STAT1 activation may
be used for therapeutic strategies to inhibit neuroinflammation and
BBB dysfunction in HIV/AIDS (55).
In addition, HIV-associated neurologic disorders (HAND) are
serious problems among HIV-infected individuals. HIV encephalitis is often involved in the most severe form of HAND, with glial
activation, cytokine-chemokine dysregulation, and neuronal damage and loss (56). HIV encephalitis has been associated with higher
levels of the mitogen platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) B
chain in the brain, which can be modified by ERK1/2 and JNK
signaling pathways and the downstream transcription factor early
growth response 1 (56). Exposure of astrocytes to PDGF-B may
cause the production of proinflammatory cytokines MCP-1 and
IL-1β. Such understanding may help with the discovery of intervention strategies for HAND.
It is necessary to understand the effects of psychological interventions on HIV disease markers such as neuroendocrine hormone
regulation and immune status. A meta-analysis found that behavioral interventions for HIV-positive persons have been efficacious
in improving psychological status with beneficial effects on neuroendocrine and immune functions (57).

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

5. Conclusion
and Future
Perspectives

117

In summary, the elucidation of inflammatory markers, cytokine
networks, and immune-brain-behavior interactions may help establish PNI profiles for the identification of potential targets for personalized interventions in at risk populations (16, 19). Levels of
inflammation-related proteins in the blood can be measured for
diagnosis and for monitoring treatment responsiveness by drugs
affecting inflammation-related pathways, such as antidepressants
and mood stabilizers. Although such investigations are still in their
early stages, developments in this direction may lead to some breakthroughs to meet the challenges in the current biomedicine (4).
Because the same factors may be involved in different pathways
and health conditions, targeting such factors may be potentially
helpful for blocking various pathways in diseases. For instance,
chronic exposure to cytokines including IFN-α has been found to
influence regional brain activity, leading to the depletion of dopamine, and affecting the activity of the diurnal HPA axis (28). These
alterations may result in depression. In addition, IFN-α may also
influence metabolic enzymes such as IDO and cytokine signaling
pathways such as p38 MAPK (38). Such changes may affect the
synthesis and reuptake of serotonin, causing behavioral alterations
including psychomotor slowing and fatigue (26). The common factors such as IFN-α can be used as the potential therapeutic targets.
In addition, the understanding of the general pathways among
different disorders may contribute to the transition from the disease-centered medicine to human-centered medicine. This is
because these common pathways may serve as the potential therapeutic targets, rather than the diseases (4). For instance, stressors
may cause changes in the neurotransmitter systems such as
GABAergic and monoamine functioning, leading to the dysregulation of growth factors such as BDNF, and influencing cellular viability such as via NFκB and MAP kinase pathways (30). These
changes are important in many stress-related diseases such as
depression, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and cardiovascular disease (30).
Integrative strategies targeting these pathways would be useful
for the prevention and treatment of a spectrum of diseases that
share the common links. For example, minocycline has antiinflammatory effects, and can inhibit the activation of microglia
and the generation of IL-1, p38 MAPK, as well as NF-κB (25). In
another example, the drug etanercept targeting the TNF-α-related
pathways has been found to have beneficial effects in many diseases
including depression, alcohol addiction, and arthritis (19, 34).
NF-κB plays a critical role in inflammation and its behavioral effects.
A form of vitamin E called tocopherol has been found to inhibit
NF-κB, the related neuroinflammatory, as well as behavioral

118

Q. Yan

changes (25). With the identification of potential biomarkers and
systemic networks, it would be possible to establish PNI profiles for
differentiating patient subgroups for more accurate diagnosis and
optimal therapies toward personalized medicine.
References
1. Yan Q (2010) Translational bioinformatics and
systems biology approaches for personalized
medicine. Methods Mol Biol 662:167–178
2. Yan Q (2011) Translation of psychoneuroimmunology into personalized medicine: a systems
biology perspective. Person Med 8:641–649
3. Reckow S, Gormanns P, Holsboer F et al
(2008) Psychiatric disorders biomarker
identification: from proteomics to systems biology. Pharmacopsychiatry 41(suppl 1):S70–S77
4. Yan Q (2011) Toward the integration of personalized and systems medicine: challenges, opportunities and approaches. Person Med 8:1–4
5. O’Connor M-F, Bower JE, Cho HJ et al (2009)
To assess, to control, to exclude: effects of
biobehavioral factors on circulating inflammatory
markers. Brain Behav Immun 23:887–897
6. Dantzer R, Capuron L, Irwin MR (2008)
Identification and treatment of symptoms associated with inflammation in medically ill patients.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 33:18–29
7. Klengel T, Binder EB (2011) Using gene–environment interactions to target personalized
treatment in mood disorder. Person Med
8:23–34
8. Yan Q (2008) The integration of personalized
and systems medicine: bioinformatics support
for pharmacogenomics and drug discovery.
Methods Mol Biol 448:1–19
9. Yan Q (2010) Immunoinformatics and systems
biology methods for personalized medicine.
Methods Mol Biol 662:203–220
10. Goncharova LB, Tarakanov AO (2007)
Molecular networks of brain and immunity.
Brain Res Rev 55:155–166
11. Zhang Y, Filiou MD, Reckow S et al (2011)
Proteomic and metabolomic profiling of a trait
anxiety mouse model implicate affected pathways.
Mol Cell Proteomics 10(12):M111.008110
12. Gormanns P, Mueller NS, Ditzen C et al (2011)
Phenome-transcriptome correlation unravels
anxiety and depression related pathways. J
Psychiatr Res 45:973–979
13. Sequeira PA, Martin MV, Vawter MP (2012)
The first decade and beyond of transcriptional
profiling in schizophrenia. Neurobiol Dis
45(1):23–36
14. Taylor AG, Goehler LE, Galper DI et al (2010)
Top-down and bottom-up mechanisms in

mind-body medicine: development of an integrative framework for psychophysiological
research. Explore (NY) 6:29–41
15. Yan Q (2011) Understanding and applying
personalized therapeutics at systems level:
role for translational bioinformatics. Curr
Pharmacogenomics Person Med 9:137–147
16. Capuron L, Miller AH (2011) Immune system
to brain signaling: neuropsychopharmacological
implications. Pharmacol Ther 130:226–238
17. The systems biology database of cytokines.
Available from http:// www.pharmtao.com/
cytokines. Accessed Jan 2012
18. Wilson CJ, Finch CE, Cohen HJ (2002)
Cytokines and cognition—the case for a headto-toe inflammatory paradigm. J Am Geriatr
Soc 50:2041–2056
19. Dean B (2011) Understanding the role of
inflammatory-related pathways in the pathophysiology and treatment of psychiatric disorders:
evidence from human peripheral studies and
CNS studies. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 14:
997–1012
20. Zhao J-B, Zhang Y, Li G-Z et al (2011)
Activation of JAK2/STAT pathway in cerebral
cortex after experimental traumatic brain injury
of rats. Neurosci Lett 498:147–152
21. Copf T, Goguel V, Lampin-Saint-Amaux A
et al (2011) Cytokine signaling through the
JAK/STAT pathway is required for long-term
memory in Drosophila. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 108:8059–8064
22. Pike JL, Irwin MR (2006) Dissociation of
inflammatory markers and natural killer cell
activity in major depressive disorder. Brain
Behav Immun 20:169–174
23. Blume J, Douglas SD, Evans DL (2011)
Immune suppression and immune activation in
depression. Brain Behav Immun 25:221–229
24. Catena-Dell’Osso M, Bellantuono C, Consoli
G et al (2011) Inflammatory and neurodegenerative pathways in depression: a new avenue
for antidepressant development? Curr Med
Chem 18:245–255
25. Haroon E, Raison CL, Miller AH (2012)
Psychoneuroimmunology meets neuropsychopharmacology: translational implications of
the impact of inflammation on behavior.
Neuropsychopharmacology 37(1):137–162

6

Translational Implications of Inflammatory Biomarkers and Cytokine Networks…

26. Miller AH (2009) Norman Cousins Lecture.
Mechanisms of cytokine-induced behavioral
changes: psychoneuroimmunology at the translational interface. Brain Behav Immun
23:149–158
27. Matsunaga M, Isowa T, Murakami H et al
(2009) Association of polymorphism in the
human mu-opioid receptor OPRM1 gene with
proinflammatory cytokine levels and health
perception. Brain Behav Immun 23:931–935
28. Raison CL, Borisov AS, Woolwine BJ et al
(2010) Interferon-alpha effects on diurnal
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity:
relationship with proinflammatory cytokines
and behavior. Mol Psychiatry 15:535–547
29. Oxenkrug GF (2011) Interferon-gammainducible kynurenines/pteridines inflammation
cascade: implications for aging and aging-associated psychiatric and medical disorders.
J Neural Transm 118:75–85
30. Anisman H, Merali Z, Hayley S (2008)
Neurotransmitter, peptide and cytokine processes in relation to depressive disorder: comorbidity between depression and neurodegenerative
disorders. Prog Neurobiol 85:1–74
31. Capuron L, Su S, Miller AH et al (2008)
Depressive symptoms and metabolic syndrome:
is inflammation the underlying link? Biol
Psychiatry 64:896–900
32. Motivala SJ, Sarfatti A, Olmos L et al (2005)
Inflammatory markers and sleep disturbance in
major depression. Psychosom Med 67:187–194
33. Thornton LM, Andersen BL, Schuler TA et al
(2009) A psychological intervention reduces
inflammatory markers by alleviating depressive
symptoms: secondary analysis of a randomized
controlled trial. Psychosom Med 71:715–724
34. Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Valladares EM et al
(2009) Tumor necrosis factor antagonism normalizes rapid eye movement sleep in alcohol
dependence. Biol Psychiatry 66:191–195
35. Guerreiro RJ, Santana I, Brás JM et al (2007)
Peripheral inflammatory cytokines as biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive
impairment. Neurodegener Dis 4:406–412
36. Tong L, Balazs R, Soiampornkul R et al (2008)
Interleukin-1 beta impairs brain derived neurotrophic factor-induced signal transduction.
Neurobiol Aging 29:1380–1393
37. Di Bona D, Plaia A, Vasto S et al (2008)
Association between the interleukin-1beta
polymorphisms and Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Brain Res
Rev 59:155–163
38. Bossù P, Ciaramella A, Salani F et al (2008)
Interleukin-18 produced by peripheral blood
cells is increased in Alzheimer’s disease and

119

correlates with cognitive impairment. Brain
Behav Immun 22:487–492
39. Lee SJ, Drabik K, Van Wagoner NJ et al (2000)
ICAM-1-induced expression of proinflammatory
cytokines in astrocytes: involvement of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase pathways. J Immunol
165:4658–4666
40. Kiyota T, Okuyama S, Swan RJ et al (2010)
CNS expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine
interleukin-4 attenuates Alzheimer’s diseaselike pathogenesis in APP+PS1 bigenic mice.
FASEB J 24:3093–3102
41. Strle K, Zhou JH, Shen WH et al (2001)
Interleukin-10 in the brain. Crit Rev Immunol
21:427–449
42. Juhász G, Földi I, Penke B (2011) Systems
biology of Alzheimer’s disease: how diverse
molecular changes result in memory impairment in AD. Neurochem Int 58:739–750
43. Olson L, Humpel C (2010) Growth factors
and cytokines/chemokines as surrogate biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid and blood for
diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive impairment. Exp Gerontol 45:41–46
44. Ahima RS (2006) Adipose tissue as an endocrine organ. Obesity (Silver Spring) 14(suppl
5):242S–249S
45. Zhang F, Chen Y, Heiman M et al (2005)
Leptin: structure, function and biology. Vitam
Horm 71:345–372
46. Ahima RS, Qi Y, Singhal NS (2006) Adipokines
that link obesity and diabetes to the hypothalamus. Prog Brain Res 153:155–174
47. Metlakunta AS, Sahu M, Yasukawa H et al
(2011) Neuronal suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 deficiency enhances hypothalamic leptindependent
phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase
signaling. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol 300:R1185–R1193
48. Capuron L, Poitou C, Machaux-Tholliez D
et al (2011) Relationship between adiposity,
emotional status and eating behaviour in obese
women: role of inflammation. Psychol Med
41:1517–1528
49. Empana JP, Sykes DH, Luc G et al (2005)
Contributions of depressive mood and circulating inflammatory markers to coronary heart
disease in healthy European men: the
Prospective
Epidemiological
Study
of
Myocardial Infarction (PRIME). Circulation
111:2299–2305
50. Klocke R, Kuhlmann MT, Scobioala S et al
(2008) Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF) for cardio- and cerebrovascular regenerative applications. Curr Med Chem 15:
968–977

120

Q. Yan

51. Planas AM, Gorina R, Chamorro A (2006)
Signalling pathways mediating inflammatory
responses in brain ischaemia. Biochem Soc
Trans 34(pt 6):1267–1270
52. Karikó K, Weissman D, Welsh FA (2004)
Inhibition of toll-like receptor and cytokine signaling–a unifying theme in ischemic tolerance.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 24:1288–1304
53. Zhang W, Stanimirovic D (2002) Current and
future therapeutic strategies to target
inflammation in stroke. Curr Drug Targets
Inflamm Allergy 1:151–166
54. Cole SW (2008) Psychosocial influences on
HIV-1 disease progression: neural, endocrine,
and virologic mechanisms. Psychosom Med
70:562–568

55. Yang B, Akhter S, Chaudhuri A et al (2009)
HIV-1 gp120 induces cytokine expression, leukocyte adhesion, and transmigration across the
blood–brain barrier: modulatory effects of
STAT1 signaling. Microvasc Res 77:212–219
56. Bethel-Brown C, Yao H, Callen S et al (2011)
HIV-1 Tat-mediated induction of plateletderived growth factor in astrocytes: role of early
growth response gene 1. J Immunol 186:
4119–4129
57. Carrico AW, Antoni MH (2008) Effects of psychological interventions on neuroendocrine
hormone regulation and immune status in
HIV-positive persons: a review of randomized
controlled trials. Psychosom Med 70:
575–584

Chapter 7
Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s
Disease: A Multiplex Approach
Darcy Litteljohn and Shawn Hayley
Abstract
Cytokines, which are immunological messengers facilitating both intra- and inter-system communication,
are considered central players in the neuroinflammatory cascades associated with the neurodegenerative
process in Parkinson’s disease (PD) and other neurological disorders. They have also been implicated in
depression and other cognitive (e.g., memory impairment, dementia) and affective disturbances (e.g.,
anxiety) that show high co-morbidity with neurodegenerative diseases. As such, cytokines may hold great
promise as serological biomarkers in PD, with potential applications ranging from early diagnosis and
disease staging, to prognosis, drug discovery, and tracking the response to treatment. Subclassification or
risk stratification in PD could be based (among other things) on reliably determined cytokine panel profiles
or “signatures” of particular co-morbid disease states or at-risk groups (e.g., PD alone, PD with depression
and/or dementia). Researchers and clinicians seeking to describe cytokine variations in health vs. disease
will benefit greatly from technologies that allow a high degree of multiplexing and thus permit the simultaneous determination of a large roster of cytokines in single small-volume samples. The need for such
highly paralleled assays is underscored by the fact that cytokines do not act in isolation but rather against
a backdrop of complementary and antagonistic cytokine effects; ascribing valence to the actions of any one
cytokine thus requires specific knowledge about the larger cytokine milieu. This chapter provides a technological overview of the major cytokine multiplex assay platforms before discussing the implications of
such tools for biomarker discovery and related applications in PD and its depressive and cognitive
co-morbidities.
Key words: Multiplex assays, Cytokine, Inflammation, Parkinson’s disease, Co-morbidity, Biomarker,
Psychoneuroimmunology

1. Introduction
Biomarkers are objective and reliably determined biological
indicators of physiological and pathological processes. Once validated, biomarkers can be used as surrogate end-points (i.e., for
clinical ones) to track biological responses to treatment, provided
that they correlate well with disease progression (and clinical scales)

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_7, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

121

122

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

and predict the clinical endpoint(s) without being directly affected
by the treatment (1). As it currently stands, several promising
clinical, genetic, serological, and imaging biomarkers have been
suggested for a number of complex neurological illnesses, including
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD). However,
owing largely to a paucity of successful replication studies and the
relative novelty of many of these markers, diagnosis and tracking of
disease progression remain largely the purview of clinical acumen
(2). This is problematic given that clinically derived diagnoses are
sometimes fallible; indeed, early PD—a window of time during
which disease-modulating therapies are likely to be most effective—is misdiagnosed by even experienced clinicians ~25% of the
time (3).
In addition to their potential diagnostic value, biomarkers hold
promise for disease staging, progression, prognosis, and tracking
biological responses to treatment (i.e., markers of trait, state, rate,
and fate) (4). Disease subclassification represents another worthwhile directive of biomarker research, particularly in the context of
CNS spectrum disorders (e.g., autism, schizophrenia) and diseases
of uncertain or suspected mixed etiology, such as PD and depression. Indeed, biomarker profiling can be applied to CNS diseases
that show a high degree of co-morbidity in the hopes of delineating
specific biological patterns or “signatures” that characterize a
particular co-morbid state or a heightened vulnerability to comorbidity (e.g., PD alone or co-morbid with depression or
dementia). This information could, in turn, conceivably inform the
development of more highly targeted and personalized adjuvant
therapies that could be initiated at early, potentially pre-co-morbid
disease stages.
While multiple mechanisms likely contribute to the pathogenesis of neurological diseases such as PD, AD, and cerebral stroke,
neuroinflammation and oxidative stress are considered primary
mediators of degenerative brain events. Microglia are the key CNS
inflammatory cells and a large body of research has implicated
activation of these cells, as well as the neuroinflammatory responses
they mediate, in the neurodegenerative progression of PD and
other neurological disorders (5). However, in practice, microglial
cells are poor targets for biomarker identification as they lack
disease specificity and only relatively expensive, time-consuming,
and technically demanding brain imaging techniques (e.g., positron
emission tomography) can resolve their activation state in vivo.
While a multimodal, combinatorial approach to biomarker discovery
is probably most prescient (e.g., drawing from clinical, genetic,
serological, and imaging modalities), biological fluid parameters,
including blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers, are perhaps
the most economically viable and efficient options. In the case of
neurological disorders, CSF, given its close proximity to and unique
relationship with the brain (CSF bathes the brain and spinal cord),

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

123

should in theory hold great promise for biomarker discovery. Yet,
blood-derived markers have the advantage of being rather easily
and safely collected; this contrasts with the more invasive lumbar
puncture procedures for removal of spinal fluid, which can themselves lead to blood contamination of CSF samples. Indeed, circulating proteins are far more abundant in plasma and serum than
in CSF, although the relationship between brain and peripheral
protein levels can be quite complex and potentially misleading.
Cytokines, which are soluble glycoprotein immune system
messengers and include various chemokines (possess chemoattractant properties) and growth factors (regulate cell growth and differentiation), are at once both key mediators of microglial activation
and primary effectors of these immunocompetent cells. In addition
to local cytokines that are synthesized de novo within the brain
(where they act in an autocrine or paracrine manner), peripherally
derived cytokines too exert tremendous influence over brain processes, mainly by: (1) acting on peripheral immune cells (leukocytes);
(2) gaining entry into the brain (extravasation, active transport
mechanisms, release by infiltrating T cells); and (3) binding receptors of the blood brain barrier (BBB) to promote and perpetuate
central inflammatory cascades (6). In this way, cytokines have been
implicated in various oxidative (e.g., superoxide, pro-oxidant
enzyme induction) and apoptotic pathways (e.g., caspases, heat
shock proteins) to cellular toxicity and neurodegeneration (6).
Indeed, evidence from clinical and animal studies has suggested an
important role of cytokines in the development of PD and other
neurodegenerative conditions, as well as some of the co-morbid
neuropsychiatric symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety) that often
accompany and in some instances predate the primary degenerative
disorder (5). The fact that cytokines are readily detectable in
peripheral fluids such as blood, CSF, and saliva, together with their
relevance and significance for brain pathology, makes these specialized immunotransmitters logical candidates for biomarker
identification in PD and other neurodegenerative disorders of
confirmed or suspected inflammatory origins.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which uses
solid-phase detection chemistry to measure a particular target
analyte in solution (capture antibody is coated onto the wells of a
microtitre plate), has long been considered the gold standard of
cytokine quantitation. While this fully quantitative and (at best)
semi-automated method boasts high specificity, sensitivity, and
throughput (assuming a 96-well plate format), only one cytokine
can be measured per assay. Single-analyte testing, while certainly
useful for some clinical and research applications, for instance
confirmatory cytokine testing in clinical practice and trial monitoring, is severely limited as a tool for biomarker discovery, with the
exception perhaps of candidate marker validation. However, even
this can be costly and inefficient, especially when the sample is

124

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

precious or volume is limited (e.g., stored clinical or rodent blood
specimens) and/or when interrogating the levels of four or more
cytokines (7).
Owing to their highly redundant and pleiotropic properties,
cytokines are best considered not in isolation, but as a network of
biologically active immunological mediators whose collective output
can effectuate significant physiological and pathological change.
Thus, the actions of any one cytokine must be considered in the
context of the larger cytokine network to which it belongs and in
whose activity it partakes. In this regard, highly multiplexed or paralleled assays that are capable of measuring the simultaneous concentrations of numerous cytokines in single, small-volume samples are
needed to accurately characterize the inflammatory cytokine makeup
of a particular disease-state (or normal physiological condition). This
is especially important in the case of PD and other degenerative brain
disorders where cytokines are considered primary mediators of
disease pathogenesis and hence, constitute important targets for
hypothesis-driven biomarker analysis and related applications such
as drug discovery and personalized medicine.
1.1. PD and Co-morbid
Depression: Role of
Cytokines

PD has classically been conceptualized as a disorder primarily of
motor functioning. Yet, symptoms tend to vary widely among PD
patients, with a substantial number of individuals displaying
neuropsychiatric and other co-morbid symptoms (e.g., autonomic
problems, sleep disturbances) in addition to the core motor disturbances (bradykinesia, cogwheel rigidity, resting tremor). Of the
co-morbid psychiatric symptoms, depression is particularly common, with 40–50% of PD patients showing clinically significant
depression (8). While co-morbid depression, anxiety, and other
psycho-emotional symptoms can have fairly obvious negative
effects on quality of life among PD patients they may also come to
affect the course of the primary neurodegenerative illness itself.
In fact, PD patients with a high degree of depressive co-morbidity
often perform more poorly on motor tasks and tests of executive
cognitive functioning (9). Moreover, these individuals are clearly
distinguishable from their non-depressed counterparts on functional
brain imaging, displaying decreased metabolism within the frontal
cortex-basal ganglia-thalamic loop (10) and impaired neuronal
activity of motor regulatory elements of the basal ganglia (e.g.,
subthalamic nucleus) (11).
Depression in the context of neurological illness might be due
to the distress attributable to the primary disease or its diagnosis,
or alternatively might stem from common underlying pathobiological processes (10); the causes of such depression need not be
mutually exclusive (see Fig. 1). According to the first perspective,
depression may arise in the context of PD due to substantial
psychosocial disease burden. In this respect, job loss, marital strain,
and bleak outlook on the future owing to the progressive and

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

125

Fig. 1. Psychoneuroimmunological contributions to PD and its co-morbid depressive illness. BDNF brain-derived
neurotrophic factor; IL-10 interleukin-10.

debilitating nature of PD have all been correlated with risk of
co-morbid depression among these individuals (12). Yet, depression and other neuropsychiatric symptoms may sometimes precede
motor impairment and the clinical diagnosis of PD, making it
unlikely that such pathology is uniformly secondary to psychological
distress (8). In such cases, the depression might reflect early degenerative, neuroinflammatory, or other pathological processes that
would likely result in disturbances of multi-neurotransmitter
systems involving extra-nigrostriatal brain centers. Interestingly,
depression along with olfactory (hyposmia) and sleep disturbances
(insomnia, REM behavior sleep disorder) have garnered substantial attention as potential clinical biomarkers of early/prodromal
PD or an increased susceptibility for developing the disorder (13);
however, alone these markers clearly lack sufficient disease specificity.
Yet, it is also important to note that some estimates suggest that
the ~40–50% of PD patients with co-morbid anxiety/depression
did not have such symptoms prior to PD motor onset and that the
neuropsychiatric symptoms only emerged following substantial
damage to brainstem or other monoaminergic regions (14).
Whatever the case, common cytokine-associated immunobiological

126

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

disturbances appear to be linked to both primary motor and
co-morbid neuropsychiatric pathology.
In the case of PD, elevated levels of numerous pro-inflammatory
cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ, were
detected within the cortex, basal ganglia, and/or limbic regions on
postmortem exam of PD brains (15). Animal studies using different toxin-based models of PD have similarly demonstrated
enhanced regional brain accumulation of many of these cytokines
(5). Moreover, several groups showed that animals could be made
resistant or refractory to toxin-induced neuronal and behavioral
pathology by knocking out, via genetic ablation or pharmacological
blockade, specific pro-inflammatory cytokines considered relevant
for human disease (e.g., TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6) (16, 17). However,
the relative contribution of central (microglia, astrocytes, perhaps
neuronal) vs. peripheral (T lymphocytes and other immune cells)
cytokine production in PD and its toxin-based animal models is
still a matter of debate. The fact that peripherally derived cytokines
can gain access to and have significant effects within the CNS,
especially in times of disease and/or with advancing age (facilitated
by BBB breakdown), nonetheless suggests that the status of peripheral cytokine networks could potentially speak to the current or
cumulative state of affairs in the degenerating brain (e.g., presence,
type, location, extent of damage). In this regard, many of the same
cytokines found increased in autopsied PD brain (e.g., TNF-α,
IL-1β, IFN-γ) were also detected at elevated levels, both basally
and upon stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), in the blood
and CSF of PD patients (18). Moreover, severity of parkinsonism
has been shown to correlate with the levels of at least some of
these peripheral cytokines (18, 19).
Evidence from human, other primate, and rodent studies has
likewise argued convincingly in favor of the view that cytokines
contribute to the evolution of major depression and probably other
affective pathologies. As in PD, blood (circulating and mitogenprovoked) and CSF levels of many pro-inflammatory cytokines,
including TNF-α, IL-1α, IL-6, and IFN-γ, were found elevated
along with other inflammatory factors (e.g., acute phase proteins)
in depressed patients, especially those with relatively severe (melancholic) or treatment-resistant illness (6, 20, 21). As well, it was
reported that the normal IL-6 circadian rhythm was disturbed
among depressed patients (22), and that the usually strong positive
correlation between plasma IL-6 and IL-10 concentrations was
completely absent in these individuals (23). In the latter study,
blood levels of IL-10 were actually diminished among depressed
patients while IL-6 levels trended towards being increased, suggesting that the loss of a counter-balancing, immunoregulatory
association between the two cytokines (IL-10 levels normally
increase in response to pro-inflammatory IL-6 induction) may
contribute to inflammation-related depression symptoms (23).

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

127

Positive correlations have also been observed between severity
of depressive symptoms and the blood concentration of several
cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α (6); and several
reports have hinted at the ability of common antidepressant drugs
(e.g., SSRIs) to normalize blood levels of at least some cytokines in
depressed individuals (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6) (24). These reports are
consistent with other studies linking antidepressants to the
modulation of the T-helper type-1 (Th1)/Th2 cytokine balance,
specifically the suppression of pro-inflammatory Th1-type cytokines (IFN-γ, IL-12) in favor of the more anti-inflammatory Th2-type
cytokines (IL-10, IL-4) (25). However, ongoing controversy
surrounding whether and which cytokine changes are normalized
with successful antidepressant treatment, stirred by multiple
conflicting studies (see ref. (24) for a recent meta-analysis), tends
to suggest that cytokines might serve best as trait markers of certain sub-types of this highly heterogeneous disease.
In addition, cancer and hepatitis C patients receiving IFN-α
immunotherapy were found to develop prominent neuropsychiatric
symptoms, including a depressive-like syndrome that was amenable
to antidepressant treatment (26). Correspondingly, rodents treated
with IFN-α displayed marked signs of anhedonia, impaired hippocampal neurogenesis, and a reduction of cortical neuronal fiber
density (27, 28). Moreover, we have shown that systemic IFN-α
administration provoked neurochemical changes implicated in
depression (altered 5-HT and NE activity) within several stressorsensitive brain regions (29). Similarly, numerous other proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α, IFN-γ, and members of
the interleukin family of cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-2), have
also been linked to depressive-like neural and behavioral pathology
in rodents (6, 30). Exposure to cytokines or cytokine-inducing
immune agents (e.g., LPS, polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly
I:C)) might have especially marked CNS consequences when
encountered in the context of concomitant xenobiotic, physical, or
psychological stressor challenge, each of which can contribute to a
breakdown of the BBB, thus facilitating the entry of peripheral
immune factors into the brain. For instance, we found that the
impact of IFN-α upon neurotransmitter and glucocorticoid
activity was greatly augmented when the cytokine was administered on the backdrop of a psychosocial stressor (disruption of
social order) (29), as would be expected in human immunotherapy
patients experiencing considerable distress.
Multiple lines of evidence have thus helped shape and promote
the emerging belief that inflammatory processes critically involving
the actions of many pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines may be a
critical common pathway to neurological illness and co-morbid
depression. It stands to reason, then, that cytokines may be ideal
candidate biomarkers for neurodegenerative disorders such as PD
and AD, particularly in the context of early screening among

128

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

neurological patients for the presence or risk of co-morbid psychiatric
pathology. We believe that dysregulation of peripheral cytokine
markers (and potentially other inflammation-related factors) may
reflect brain pathology because: (1) cytokine-associated inflammatory
processes are causally related to neurodegeneration; (2) cytokine
cascades are mounted in direct response to ongoing pathology; and
(3) cytokines partake in CNS-based crosstalk across the BBB.
Yet, it should be underscored from the outset that cytokines, as
orchestrators of the inflammatory immune system and facilitators of
myriad psycho-neuro-endocrine-immune interactions, are by their
very nature disease nonspecific. While specificity can be promoted
(and in theory perhaps achieved) by combining individual cytokine
markers into multianalyte disease profiles or signatures, there is
bound to be some degree of residual overlap between diseasestates. It is our position therefore that cytokines, and hence the
multiplexed cytokine panels discussed in this chapter, may be best
suited as adjunctive tools or “add-ons” to clinical diagnostics and
potentially other biomarker modalities. In this way, cytokine multiplexing could conceivably help to improve the accuracy of early
and differential PD diagnosis, and to refine co-morbid disease risk
stratification in PD and other neurological disorders.

2. Cytokine
Multiplex Assays
The last couple of decades have seen the development of several
promising cytokine multiplex technologies, spurred on largely by
the limitations of traditional ELISA and other conventional quantitative methods (e.g., radioimmunoassay) for handling the everexpanding multiplex requirements of present-day research and
clinical applications. While the focus of this chapter will be restricted
primarily to protein-level cytokine multiplex assays, it should be
mentioned that nucleic acid-based multiplexing tools have also
been developed and applied with some success to drug discovery
and the elucidation of cytokine-associated disease mechanisms
(31, 32). In this regard, while proteins are certainly the key molecular players in cellular biological processes, changes in cytokine
transcription and translation, as well as post-translational protein
modifications (e.g., glycosylation, phosphorylation, acetylation),
can have important consequences for both cytokine expression and
function. Thus, an integrated strategy combining analytical molecular and proteomic approaches will be best suited to detecting
both gross and nuanced changes in cytokine network expression
among healthy vs. diseased populations. Similarly, while a discussion
of global comparative proteomic methods (e.g., mass spectrometry,
ultra-high-density protein microarray chip technology) is outside
the scope of this chapter, their importance to biomarker discovery

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

129

in PD and other complex brain diseases should not be understated
(see ref. (33) for a good review).
Drawing from traditional sandwich ELISA principles, virtually
all current cytokine multiplex assays feature solid-phase capture
and label-based detection chemistries in either of two basic formats:
cytometric bead-based arrays or planar solid-platform-based arrays.
As shown in Fig. 2, anti-cytokine capture antibodies are immobilized in parallel assays onto solid supports, which take the form
either of rigid two-dimensional platforms/membranes or threedimensional polystyrene (and more recently magnetic) microspheres. Following incubation with biological samples, captured
analyte (cytokines or other biomolecular targets) is detected by
labeled reporter antibodies. The method of detection differs
between assay platforms and ranges from fluorescent and chemiluminescent techniques to electrogenerated chemiluminescence (or
electrochemiluminescence, ECL). Differences in dynamic range,
sensitivity, degree of multiplexing, and cost (equipment and consumables) exist among the different multiplex platforms, and
between these newer technologies and conventional ELISA. These
and other issues will be discussed in the sections that follow.
2.1. Bead-Based
Arrays: Technological
Overview

The defining characteristic of bead-based arrays, otherwise known
as liquid, suspension or flow cytometric arrays, is the use of multiple different populations of antibody-conjugated microspheres

Fig. 2. Overview of bead-based and planar multiplex technologies.

130

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

for building multiplex immunoassays. The polystyrene beads,
usually no larger than 10 μm in diameter, are size and/or colorcoded (with one or more internal fluorophore), rendering them
distinguishable via light scatter or internal fluorescence-intensity
ratio upon flow cytometric analysis. Fluorophore-conjugated
reporter antibodies, with an emission spectrum distinct from the
encoding fluorophores, provide the analyte-dependent immunoassay signal, which is also read out using flow cytometry. Finally,
experimentally derived calibration curves are used to relate signal
response of the distinct microsphere sets (typically 50–100 beads
within each bead population) to the concentration of target analytes in sample. While the bead-based approaches to multiplexing
pose several distinct disadvantages (e.g., increased vulnerability to
cross-reactivity between antibodies and other proteins in solution)
(34), analyte quantification is usually performed with high sensitivity
(pg/mL), wide dynamic range (at least 3 logs), and good precision.
Bead-based multiplex platforms are also readily automated by a
wide range of liquid handling systems.
The Luminex 100/200 system (Luminex Corp.) uses proprietary xMAP (multianalyte profiling) technology and a flow
cytometry-based Luminex analyzer to detect up to 100 different
analytes in a single microplate well containing 25 μL sample (50 μL
if running duplicates). Up to 100 distinct sets of microspheres
(~5.6 μm MicroPlex polystyrene beads) are internally dyed with
different ratios of red and infrared fluorophores, which have coincidental excitation spectra but distinct emission bands (35). Each
bead population is conjugated to a different cytokine-specific capture antibody and thus bears a unique immunoassay. The suspended
beads, following incubation with sample or standards and streptavidinphycoerythrin-(PE)-conjugated detection antibodies in porous
96-well filter plates, are aspirated (by vacuum) into the Luminex
analyzer’s flow chamber. Passing rapidly and individually through
the flow cell, a red classification laser (635 nm) identifies the particular cytokine bound (based on the microsphere’s spectral address)
and a second green reporter laser (532 nm) quantifies the immunoassay response signal. Standard calibration curve generation and
data analysis are facilitated by specialized multiplex curve-fitting
software packages supporting the four or five parameter logistic
nonlinear regression models (e.g., MasterPlex QT).
Numerous mouse and human multiplex cytokine kits (with
~10–20 cytokines on each panel) are commercially available (e.g.,
Millipore, Bio-Rad, Invitrogen, Panomics), although Luminex’s
open-architecture xMAP technology allows researchers to customize
multiplex immunoassay panels (with in theory up to 100 different
analytes, but in practice typically <30 due to potential issues of
antibody cross-reactivity). We typically utilize custom designed kits
comprising both pro-inflammatory (IFN-α, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6,
IL-8, IL-12) and anti-inflammatory (IL-4, IL-10, TGF-β) cytokines.

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

131

High-throughput 96-well microplates allow ~40 samples to be run
in duplicate; the remaining wells contain standards and various
quality controls. To control for nonspecific antibody binding and
thus increase the signal-to-noise ratio, we generally use two separate positive controls at two different concentrations. As well, a
negative control serves as a background measure that is subtracted
from all sample wells. Using this procedure we have recently
published several papers demonstrating time-dependent brain and
blood cytokine variations in response to various PD- and/or
depression-relevant xenobiotic (paraquat), psychogenic (social
housing manipulations, chronic stress), and immunogenic insults
(LPS, poly I:C) (30, 36, 37).
The Luminex 100/200 system has probably become the foremost bead-based multiplexing system used in research and clinical
settings; however, two xMAP technology-based platforms recently
introduced by Luminex Corp., namely the FLEXMAP 3D and
MAGPIX systems, hold the promise of substantial improvements
in multiplexing capability and cost efficiency, respectively. Two
major differences separate the FLEXMAP 3D system from its
Luminex 100/200 predecessor. Firstly, polystyrene microspheres
are impregnated with different ratios of three (as opposed to two)
internal fluorophores, enabling the discrimination of up to 500
discrete bead populations and consequently, the multiplexing of up
to 500 different assays (in theory). Secondly, instrumentation
innovations, including dual sample fluidics paths and 384-well
plate compatibility, provide for higher throughput and faster
readout times. The FLEXMAP 3D system also boasts a wider
dynamic range compared to the Luminex 100/200 (4.5 logs vs.
3.5 logs) and is highly amenable to automation.
While the strength of the FLEXMAP 3D system thus lies in
the capacity for high-density and high-throughput screening, the
newer MAGPIX system offers an (relatively) affordable means of
performing fully quantitative, low-to-medium density (up to 50
analytes), and high-throughput (~40 samples) applications.
According to company literature, even when running single-plex
tests the MAGPIX system provides cost-savings over traditional
ELISA because it circumvents the need for filter plates; yet, capital
equipment costs should certainly not be overlooked (38). Further
strengths of this instrument are its compact size (W × D × H:
16.5 cm × 60 cm × 43 cm) and portability. Like the Luminex
100/200 and FLEXMAP 3D systems, the MAGPIX platform is
built on established xMAP technology; however, the slightly larger
(6.4 μm) polystyrene MagPlex beads used in the MAGPIX system
are embedded with superparamagnetic ferrite (iron oxide) nanoparticles. These microspheres behave magnetically only upon application of an extrinsic magnetic field (domains become temporarily
aligned) and have the distinct advantage of being readily amenable
to high-throughput automation. Indeed, since magnetic beads can

132

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

be immobilized with magnets during washing steps, the requirement
for vacuum/suction-driven filter plate washers (i.e., using a physical barrier to entrap beads while permitting solution to pass
through) and the potentially serious complications associated
with this method, such as filter plate leaking and clogging, can be
abrogated (39, 40).
Similar to the older-generation MicroPlex spheres, spectral
coding of MagPlex beads is accomplished by impregnating different microsphere sets with specific combinations of fluorescent dyes;
this permits the multiplexing of up to 50 analytes in a single sample.
Further setting the MAGPIX system apart is its use of light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) instead of lasers to excite the classification and reporter
fluorophores, and its reliance on CCD fluorescence imaging and
detection (an externally applied magnetic field temporarily immobilizes the beads), as opposed to flow cytometric quantification
methods. While few studies have been published using the new
MAGPIX system, assay reproducibility and performance (e.g., sensitivity, linear dynamic range, standard recovery) using multiplex
kits from at least two different suppliers (Bio-Rad and Millipore)
appear to be comparable to the established Luminex 100/200
system (41). MagPlex bead compatibility has also been established
for both the Luminex 100/200 and FLEXMAP 3D platforms,
allowing for up to 80-plex or 500-plex assays, respectively.
Similar to the approach taken by Luminex with its xMAP technology, both eBioscience’s FlowCytomix array and the BD
(Beckton Dickinson) Cytometric Bead Array (CBA) use antibodycoated microbeads (4.4 μm and 5.5 μm, and 7.5 μm, respectively)
to capture multiple target analytes in solution. Distinct bead
populations are identified on flow cytometry either by internal
fluorescence-intensity ratio (CBA) or the combination of a
monofluorescent signal and bead size (FlowCytomix); in both
cases, PE fluorescence intensity generates the assay response signal.
Since the various fluorophores used in the FlowCytomix and CBA
systems are readily excitable at 488 nm, any flow cytometer
equipped with a standard blue laser can be used for assay readout;
this represents a potentially substantial cost-savings advantage over
the Luminex systems. However, the degree of multiplexing supported by the FlowCytomix and CBA platforms is somewhat limited compared to the xMAP technology-based arrays, ranging from
around 20 different analytes per sample in the FlowCytomix array
to upwards of 30 in the CBA system.
2.2. Planar Arrays:
Technological Overview

Like the multiplex bead-based assays, planar membrane-based
approaches to multiplexing borrow heavily from traditional
sandwich ELISA principles. Cytokine-specific capture antibodies
are arrayed onto any one of several types of solid support, most
commonly the individual wells of polystyrene microtitre plates.
While assay identification in bead-based arrays relies upon the

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

133

physical (size) and/or optical encoding (internal fluorescent
intensity) of antibody-conjugated bead sets, planar multiplexes
instead use a positional coding scheme, wherein the location of
spotted antibody in a two-dimensional array (e.g., within a microwell) defines a particular immunoassay. Following incubation with
biological samples or standards, labeled detection antibodies form
immunosandwiches with bound analyte and surface-immobilized
capture antibody. Typically, assay reaction signals are read out
using a streptavidin/horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-based chemiluminescence system, although at least one commercial platform
features ECL imaging and detection. The sensitivity (pg/mL) and
dynamic range (3–4 logs) of these assays is generally comparable
to if not better than traditional ELISA.
The technologically similar Multiplex ELISA from Quansys
Bioscience, alternately called Q-Plex array technology, and the
SearchLight Chemiluminescent Protein Array kits from Aushon
Bioscience use standard 96-well microplates as the solid support
structure for multiple ELISA assays in parallel. The Q-Plex also
supports a 384-well platform. Multiplexing in these high-throughput
sandwich ELISA systems is achieved by spotting up to 16
(SearchLight) or 25 (Q-Plex) different capture antibodies onto the
bottom of each microwell in a spatially discrete manner. The precise
x, y coordinates of a spot within a given well thus defines a distinct
capture antibody population/immunoassay across all wells in a
plate. After incubation with biological specimens and standards,
bound analyte is visualized with streptavidin-HRP and chemiluminescent detection. High-resolution fluorescence scanning (with a
CCD imaging system) captures an image of the plate, from which
the concentration of target analytes in the multiple samples is
determined using any number of array software programs.
Analogously, Research & Diagnostics Systems’ Mosaic ELISA permits the simultaneous determination of up to eight different analytes in as little as 13–50 μL of sample. As with the Q-plex and
SearchLight technologies, good throughput is achieved by running
duplicate samples in 96-well microtitre plates. However, the Mosaic
platform does not at present support customization, as kit selection is limited to two pre-spotted panels of 6 (human growth
factor panel) or 8 capture antibodies (human cytokine panel).
An alternative to multiplexing with chemiluminescent detection,
Aushon Biosystems’ SearchLight Infrared (IR) Array kits use
DyLight 800 labeled streptavidin conjugates, which feature nearIR fluorescence and narrow emission profiles, for detecting up to
24 different cytokines (human or mouse) in single small-volume
samples. The core principles of this assay are the same as for the
SearchLight chemiluminescent array (e.g., multiplex sandwich
ELISA, capture antibodies spotted in defined arrays into the wells
of a 96-well plate), but the near-IR fluorometric analysis requires
an Odyssey or Aerius IR Imaging System (LI-COR) and appropriate

134

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

array analysis software. Also featuring fluorescence detection, the
FAST Quant system from Whatman, part of GE Healthcare, uses
nitrocellulose-coated glass FAST slides as the solid-phase substrate
for multiplexed assays in lieu of the familiar 96-well microtiter
plates. In this method, 8–10 different capture antibodies are
arrayed in triplicate onto 16 nitrocellulose pads per slide. Since
triplicate values are obtained for each analyte in sample/standard
(and due to the solid-phase nature of the assay), there is no need
to run duplicate samples; this helps to both conserve sample and
promote assay throughput (42). Indeed, as each FAST Quant kit
contains four slides, and more than one kit can be run using the
same standards (albeit at the same time), the FAST Quant system
is readily amenable to high-throughput. A fluorescence scanner is
required to image Cy5 signal intensity (these kits use a streptavidin–
Cy5 detection system) and data analysis is performed with specialized protein array software (e.g., MicroVigene).
Using pre-arrayed FAST slides, Whatman has only recently
started offering the FAST Quant 40 Human kit, a higher-density
array capable of simultaneously quantifying 40 cytokines in human
samples. In this configuration, the 40 immunoassays are actually
divided into two sub-arrays of immobilized capture antibodies (18plex and 22-plex, respectively). Each sub-array is printed eight
times per slide, corresponding to the 16 nitrocellulose pads, and
requires its own standards. Thus, while assay selection, customizability, and throughput are diminished (the kit of four slides can
run 24 samples), the FAST Quant 40 Human assay represents a
significant upgrade in plex level over the older 8–10-plex kits.
Meso Scale Diagnostics’ (MSD, a division of Meso Scale
Discovery) MULTI-SPOT assay systems use oxidative-reduction
ECL detection technology for multiplexing up to ten analytes per
well (containing ~25 μL of sample) of a specialized 96-well carbon
electrode microplate. Up to ten different capture antibody populations are directly adsorbed in array format on high-binding capacity carbon electrodes embedded in the bottom of 4-, 7-, or 10-spot
MULTI-SPOT plates. The desired plex level determines which of
the three basic MULTI-SPOT plate geometries is used; a 1-spot
MICRO-ARRAY plate is also offered for single-plex applications.
Following incubation with analytes in sample, detection antibodies
labeled with proprietary electrochemiluminescent SULFO-TAG
NHS ester reagent (ruthenium (II) tris-bipyridine; Ru(bpy)32+)
complete the sandwich immunocomplex and provide the analytedependent luminescence signal when electrochemically stimulated
in the presence of the ECL coreactant, tripropylamine (TPA).
Briefly, upon application of a voltage to the plate electrodes
using any one of several SECTOR imaging systems, both ruthenium
(label/luminophore) and TPA (ECL coreactant in read buffer) are
oxidized at the electrodes’ surface. TPA+ rapidly and spontaneously
loses a proton to form the highly reactive neutral TPA+ intermediate,

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

135

which reduces the ruthenium-bipyridine moiety to form a divalent
excited state ruthenium complex (Ru(bpy)32+*). On relaxation back
to the ground state a photon at ~620 nm is emitted (43). Multiple
oxidative-reduction cycles involving ruthenium SULFO-TAG
labels and TPA (which is consumed in the reaction) amplifies the
luminescent signal and in so doing enhances assay sensitivity. In the
SECTOR reader, an ultra-low noise CCD camera images the luminescent intensity of the ECL labels, enabling quantitation of analytes with appropriate data analysis tools. MSD’s ECL-based
approach to multiplexing offers several distinct advantages, including ultra high sensitivity (lower limit of detection <1 pg/mL for
most cytokines), minimal nonspecific background signals (which
contributes to high sensitivity), a broad linear dynamic range (up
to 5 logs), and compatibility with complex biological matrices such
as vaginal fluid (44). Higher throughput 384-well MULTI-SPOT
(and 1536-well MULTI-ARRAY) plates are also available, but only
in lower-plex configurations.
2.3. Comparisons
and Considerations
of Multiplex Cytokine
Assays

Overall, cytokine multiplex technologies hold several advantages
over conventional ELISA, the most obvious and important being
the ability to multiplex or run multiple parallel assays in single,
small-volume samples. Simultaneous cytokine measurement is
highly desirable in the context of network-based approaches to
biomarker discovery, wherein major emphasis is placed not only on
identifying candidate biomarkers, but understanding the interplay
between the various cytokine family members (45). From a practical perspective, multiplexing becomes particularly advantageous
when quantifying sample that is either precious or limited in volume. Indeed, compared to running multiple separate ELISAs,
multiplex assays require far less sample, reagent (especially antibodies), and labor time (parallel assays that are highly amenable to
automation); and therefore have the potential to dramatically
reduce costs (7). Yet, any improvement in cost and time efficiencies
ought certainly to be balanced against the generally higher capital
equipment costs for high-density multiplexing systems.
Importantly, multiplex cytokine assays are able to maintain
these advantages over traditional ELISA without sacrificing performance (sensitivity, specificity) or throughput (46), although several
studies have raised questions about the reliability of these assays
(see below) (47). Moreover, the linear dynamic range exhibited by
multiplex assays is much wider than a typical sandwich ELISA (by
~2 orders of magnitude), enabling accurate cytokine quantification
with minimal dilution. While dilution helps to reduce matrix effects
in biological samples, it can also introduce substantial error and
bias into cytokine/analyte measurement, especially when large
dilution steps are required for samples that contain proteins across
a wide dynamic range of concentrations (e.g., serum, plasma).
Indeed, since dilution reduces the concentrations both of target

136

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

cytokine/analyte and soluble cytokine receptors (as well as other
circulating cytokine-binding proteins), the relative amount of
receptor-bound vs. “free” cytokine available for detection can
potentially be altered (7, 48).
While comparison studies with ELISA have generally established the validity of multiplex assays for cytokine quantitation in
biological specimens (reliability concerns notwithstanding)
(49–51), a number of recent studies reported significant differences in assay reproducibility and performance between the various
multiplex platforms and even between commercial kits for the same
system. For instance, Dabitao et al. (52) compared the performance of a 9-plex ECL-based MSD plate and a 6-plex Becton
Dickinson CBA kit for measuring pro-inflammatory cytokines in
the serum of HIV-infected patients and healthy controls. While the
two systems displayed comparable sensitivities (based on standard
curves), the MSD assay was superior in terms of accuracy (spike
recovery of cytokine) and detection frequency of endogenous
circulating cytokines. Earlier studies using serum or plasma of
healthy donors likewise reported a significant performance advantage of MSD’s ECL-based assays (number of species detected,
dynamic range, lower, and upper limits of quantification) over
bead-based systems (xMAP-based and FlowCytomix) and other
planar arrays (FASTQuant) (53, 54). Despite significant variation
in absolute cytokine values, similarities in the relative expression
patterns of cytokines between the different multiplex systems were,
however, generally noted in these studies (52, 54). Moreover, in a
direct comparison of 10-plex kits (human cytokine) from MSD
and Luminex (Invitrogen), Chowdhury et al. (54) showed that the
Luminex system had better precision compared to the more sensitive MSD platform. Indeed, bead-based assays should theoretically
have improved precision compared to planar arrays on account of
the ~50–100 individual measurements made for each assay in the
mutliplex (corresponding to the ~50–100 microspheres per bead
population) (34). Yet, Hanley et al. (55) demonstrated that variation in microsphere diameter (arising from inadequate manufacturing quality control) is a likely significant source of stochastic
variance (and hence, imprecision) in bead-based assays.
Similar to the findings reported by Dabitao et al. (52), a recent
multi-site comparison study by Breen et al. (56) revealed marked
performance differences between MSD and Luminex-based assays
(different kits from three suppliers) in the measurement of cytokines
in the serum of HIV-infected patients and healthy controls. The
authors also reported finding significant inter-laboratory and interkit variation, the latter of which probably reflects the confounding
influence of supplier differences in antibody pairs and potentially
other reagents (42). Yet, as was noted in previous studies reporting

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

137

discrepant cytokine values between same-platform kits (47, 57),
analogous patterns of cytokine perturbation were obtained using
the different xMAP panels (56).
Using LPS- and phytohemagglutinin-stimulated sodium
heparin plasma of healthy volunteers and a custom-conjugated
15-plex Luminex assay, de Jager et al. (48) showed that ostensibly
trivial processes such as sample handling (freeze-thawing) and
storage (duration, temperature) could significantly influence the
reliability and reproducibility of cytokine detection. While most
cytokines remained stable at −80 °C for ~2 years, degradation of
certain cytokines was apparent as early as 1 year after storage.
Within 4 years of storage, 10 of the 15 cytokines had degraded at
least 40% of baseline values, half of them by ~75% (48). Since Breen
et al. (56) used archival clinical plasma samples that were collected
as early as 2001 (10 years before the study’s publication) and no
later than 2006, significant degradation of cytokines during storage (and to differing degrees depending on when samples were
collected) may have contributed to the noted substantial intra- and
inter-assay variability. However, it should be mentioned that plasma
and not serum was analyzed in the study by Breen et al. (56); an
important point to consider given that detection of at least some
cytokines can be influenced by the type of biological matrix
analyzed (e.g., plasma vs. serum), particularly when multiplex tools
are used (7, 58).
To summarize, most studies to date have reported good
correlation among bead-based and planar cytokine arrays and
between multiplex assays and traditional ELISA (comparable relative changes), thus recommending the continued and expanded
use of multiplexing systems in high-throughput screening applications (e.g., early and differential disease detection). The choice
between multiplex assays is not obvious, however, and will surely
reflect the nature of the clinical or research application. Factors
such as desired plex level, assay sensitivity, dynamic range, flexibility,
and throughput; as well as the cost of both consumables and equipment will likely factor in any decision (42). For instance, while
MSD’s ECL-based systems were found to excel in key performance
measures, xMAP technology-based systems offer a higher degree
of multiplexing capacity. Yet, common to all multiplex immunoassay systems are technological and operational issues relating to
assay interference (antibody cross-reactivity, nonspecific binding,
compatibility of diluents and assay buffers, other matrix effects);
quality control (algorithms, protocols); protein vs. nucleic acid
analysis (protein denaturation, costly and time-consuming antibody development process); and data analysis and interpretation
(complex bioinformatics and computational models). These and
other challenges have been recently discussed in considerable detail
elsewhere (7, 34, 45, 59).

138

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

3. Cytokine
Multiplexing for
Biomarker
Analysis in PD

It has been exceedingly difficult to bridge the gap between basic
experimental research and the generation of usable serological
biomarkers of PD. This largely stems from the fact that neuropathological states are so highly complex and heterogeneous in terms of
etiology and mechanisms at play. According to stringent inclusion
criteria stipulated by the German Society of Experimental and
Clinical Neurotherapeutics, biomarkers for measuring PD progression and treatment efficacy should, among other things: (1) reflect
core mechanisms of neurodegeneration; (2) show good correlation
with disease progression as measured by established clinical rating
scales (e.g., UPDRS; Hoehn and Yahr scale); and (3) be validated
in preclinical animals models and replicated by at least two independent studies (1). Unfortunately, these strict requirements have
not yet been met by any proposed biomarkers for early PD or the
evaluation of its treatment. However, the experimental literature in
general has suggested a number of potential PD biomarker candidates, most notably α-synuclein and DJ-1, but these have still not
been rigorously tested in the clinical arena or else have been met
with conflicting or ambiguous/nonspecific results (60).
Clinical rating scales, especially in the hands of experienced
and specialized practitioners, can be very useful tools for diagnosing
and tracking the progression of CNS disease; however, the early
stages of neurological illnesses such as PD and AD can be extremely
difficult to detect and are often missed on clinical intake. Hence,
finding reliable biomarkers that can be objectively used for early
(differential) diagnosis, as well as assessing the course of primary
disease and likelihood of the development of certain co-morbid
symptom clusters would be invaluable (1). Specifically, detecting
pre-symptomatic or prodromal stages of disease could provide
sufficient time to implement emerging new neuroprotective treatments such as the neurotrophic factor inducer, Cogane
(PYM50028), or the antioxidant agent, coenzyme Q10, both of
which are currently in clinical trials for the treatment of early stage
PD (although preliminary findings from the CoQ10 study are not
promising). Indeed, the results of several preclinical studies using
different toxin models of PD suggested that pharmacologic attenuation or prevention of DA neuron loss required the application of
putative neuroprotective agents during a relatively narrow time
window before or after lesion induction, and definitely prior to
onset of motor symptoms (61, 62). However, other animal studies
have pointed to the surprisingly robust neuroreparative and
neurorestorative potential of some of these agents, even at times
far removed from initial toxin insult (62, 63). Nonetheless, a
majority of studies seem to agree that once neuroinflammatory and
oxidative stress cascades (and other degenerative brain processes)

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

139

reach a certain threshold momentum for neurodegeneration,
further cell loss will in all likelihood prove to be extremely difficult
to arrest or even slow down (let alone reverse). Thus, prophylactic
neuroprotective drug treatment strategies might be most useful,
but would obviously necessitate the development and implementation of highly effective early biomarkers of disease.
It should also be underscored that PD is a very heterogeneous
illness and that certain sub-types or endophenotypes of the disease
likely require specific tailored treatment regimens. Biomarker
identification could conceivably provide a better means of stratifying such diverging categories of disease. Indeed, given the substantial co-morbidity evident in PD, biomarker profiles would go a long
way in helping to establish a means of identifying which individuals
are most likely to develop specific sub-categories of co-morbid
symptoms, ranging from affective (depression, anxiety) and cognitive disturbances (executive function deficits, dementia) to potentially even sleep (insomnia, difficulty falling asleep) and autonomic
problems (gastrointestinal, genitourinary, and sexual dysfunction).
As cytokines are considered key players in the pathogenesis of both
neurological and psychiatric diseases, they may be ideally positioned
as candidate biomarkers of PD and its neuropsychiatric co-morbidities. It is our belief that multiplex array technology may be particularly well suited for assessing the potential of blood-borne cytokines
to fulfill this role. The strength of this method lies in its ability to
detect simultaneous levels of multiple cytokine species in small
amounts of sample (presumably serum or plasma), which is imperative given that cytokine impact is dependent on the coordinated
activity of the varied members of the cytokine families. Our notion
of a cytokine/biomarker-based risk stratification schema for the comorbid presentations of PD is presented in Fig. 3.
Using an ultrasensitive 8-plex ECL-based assay from MSD,
Scully et al. (64) found that female patients with “pure” irritable
Bowel syndrome (IBS), a non-life-threatening functional Bowel
disorder characterized primarily by abdominal pain, bloating, and
discomfort could be differentiated from IBS patients with extraintestinal co-morbidities (fibromyalgia, premenstrual dysmorphic
disorder, and chronic fatigue syndrome). Indeed, while IBS patients
displayed increased overall concentrations of the pro-inflammatory
cytokines, IL-6 and IL-8, relative to an age- and gender-matched
control group, additional elevations of IL-1β and TNF-α further
distinguished IBS patients with extra-intestinal co-morbid conditions. The multiplexed cytokine profiles were unable, however, to
differentiate between various clusters of co-morbid symptoms
(e.g., fibromyalgia vs. chronic fatigue syndrome). While IBS is
clearly not a CNS disorder per se (nor is it per se a “disease”) it
does involve significant dysregulation of brain, gut, immune, and
endocrine systems (65). Moreover, psychiatric co-morbidity has
been estimated to approach 60% in IBS patients (66). This study

140

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

Fig. 3. Biomarker-based risk stratification schema for the co-morbid presentations of PD. UPDRS unified Parkinson’s disease
rating scale; UPSIT University of Pennsylvania smell identification test; LRRK-2 leucine-rich repeat kinase 2; SNCA
synuclein, alpha (non A4 component of amyloid precursor); GBA β-glucocerebrosidase; DAT dopamine transporter; PET
positron emission tomography; TMS transcranial magnetic stimulation.

thus aptly demonstrates the potential of emerging multiplex
technologies to identify disease-relevant cytokine signatures in
blood and probably other bodily fluids, which can in turn be used
to help refine co-morbidity-based risk stratification schema and
expand our understanding of immunomechanisms subserving the
development of co-morbid psychiatric illness.

4. Conclusion
PD is typically diagnosed at a late stage of disease progression,
after ~70% loss of SNc dopaminergic neurons. Diagnosis at earlier,
pre-symptomatic stages would permit development of preventative,
as opposed to palliative therapies, with the potential of dramatically
slowing or otherwise altering disease progression. Given the high
rates of co-morbidity in PD and the detrimental effects these symptoms can have on quality of life and potentially even primary disease
progression, identification, and treatment of PD patients at very
early stages or increased risk of co-morbid illness is another worthwhile goal. It is our contention that using multiple serological

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

141

biomarkers, allowing one to obtain a sort of “signature” or profile
of biochemical mediators, would be a valuable addition to the clinical
work-up and follow-up of PD. In fact, when multiple blood and/
or CSF markers are combined and analyzed together rather than
independently, significant improvements in sensitivity and specificity
can often be realized. Still greater improvements could conceivably
be achieved by combining serological parameters with markers
from other modalities (e.g., clinical, imaging, genetic) (67).
The search for blood cytokine signatures of specific diseases or
subgroups of disease requires the development and implementation
of highly sensitive and reliable screening tools capable of performing
medium-to-high-density and high-throughput applications. It is in
this capacity that we advocate the use of cytokine multiplex assays
such as those discussed in this chapter. While recent advances in
mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics (e.g., isobaric tags
for relative and absolute quantitation, multiple reaction monitoring) figure to play an increasingly important role in (ultra-) highdensity biomarker profiling, high-throughput affinity-based protein
arrays should remain invaluable tools for biomarker analysis and
validation, especially for diseases in which cytokines are hypothesized or known to be primary players in disease pathogenesis.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by funds from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (D.L. and S.H.) and Parkinson Society Canada
(S.H.). S.H. is a Canada Research Chair in Neuroscience. Thanks
to Neville Ko for creating the schematic in Fig. 2.
References
1. Gerlach M et al (2012) Biomarker candidates
of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease for
the evaluation of disease-modifying therapeutics. J Neural Transm 119(1):39–52.
doi:10.1007/s00702-011-0682-x
2. Morgan JC, Mehta SH, Sethi KD (2010)
Biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease. Curr Neurol
Neurosci Rep 10:423–430
3. Tolosa E, Wenning G, Poewe W (2006) The
diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease. Lancet Neurol
5:75–86
4. Schlossmacher MG, Mollenhauer B (2010)
Biomarker research in Parkinson’s disease:
objective measures needed for patient
stratification in future cause-directed trials.
Biomark Med 4:647–650
5. Litteljohn D et al (2010) Inflammatory mechanisms of neurodegeneration in toxin-based

models of Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsons Dis
2011:713517. doi:10.4061/2011/713517
6. Anisman H, Merali Z, Hayley S (2008)
Neurotransmitter, peptide and cytokine processes in relation to depressive disorder: comorbidity between depression and neurodegenerative
disorders. Prog Neurobiol 85:1–74
7. Leng SX et al (2008) ELISA and multiplex
technologies for cytokine measurement in
inflammation and aging research. J Gerontol A
Biol Sci Med Sci 63:879–884
8. Leentjens AF et al (2003) Higher incidence of
depression preceding the onset of Parkinson’s
disease: a register study. Mov Disord 18:
414–418
9. Stefanova E et al (2006) Depression predicts
the pattern of cognitive impairment in early
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Sci 248:131–137

142

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

10. McDonald WM, Richard IH, DeLong MR
(2003) Prevalence, etiology, and treatment of
depression in Parkinson’s disease. Biol
Psychiatry 54:363–375
11. Temel Y (2007) Inhibition of 5-HT neuron
activity and induction of depressive-like behavior by high-frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
104:17087–17092
12. Frisina PG et al (2008) The effects of antidepressants in Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis.
Int J Neurosci 118:667–682
13. Berg D (2008) Biomarkers for the early detection of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurodegener Dis 5:133–136
14. Trew M, Suchowersky O (2005) Anxiety and
Parkinson’s disease. In: Pfeiffer RF, Ebadi M
(eds) Parkinson’s disease. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, pp 339–346
15. Nagatsu T, Sawada M (2005) Inflammatory
process in Parkinson’s disease: role for cytokines. Curr Pharm Des 11:999–1016
16. Mangano EN et al (2012) Interferon-gamma
plays a role in paraquat-induced neurodegeneration involving oxidative and proinflammatory
pathways. Neurobiol Aging 33(7):1411–1426.
doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.02.016
17. Tansey MG et al (2008) Neuroinflammation in
Parkinson’s disease: is there sufficient evidence
for mechanism-based interventional therapy?
Front Biosci 13:709–717
18. Reale M et al (2009) Peripheral cytokines
profile in Parkinson’s disease. Brain Behav
Immun 23:55–63
19. Chen H et al (2008) Peripheral inflammatory
biomarkers and risk of Parkinson’s disease. Am
J Epidemiol 167:90–95
20. O’Brien SM et al (2007) Plasma cytokine
profiles in depressed patients who fail to
respond to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor therapy. J Psychiatr Res 41:326–331
21. Domenici E et al (2010) Plasma protein biomarkers for depression and schizophrenia by
multi analyte profiling of case-control collections. PLoS One 5(2):e9166. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0009166
22. Alesci S et al (2005) Major depression is associated with significant diurnal elevations in
plasma interleukin-6 levels, a shift of its circadian rhythm, and loss of physiological
complexity in its secretion: clinical implications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90:2522–2530
23. Dhabhar FS et al (2009) Low serum IL-10
concentrations and loss of regulatory association between IL-6 and IL-10 in adults with
major depression. J Psychiatr Res 43:962–969

24. Hannestad J, Dellagioia N, Bloch M (2011) The
effect of antidepressant medication treatment on
serum levels of inflammatory cytokines: a metaanalysis. Neuropsychopharmacology 36(12):
2452–2459. doi:10.1038/npp. 2011.132
25. Diamond M, Kelly JP, Connor TJ (2006)
Antidepressants suppress production of the
Th1 cytokine interferon-gamma, independent
of monoamine transporter blockade. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 16:481–490
26. Raison CL et al (2005) Depression during
pegylated interferon-alpha plus ribavirin therapy: prevalence and prediction. J Clin Psychiatry
66:41–48
27. Kaneko N et al (2006) Suppression of cell proliferation by interferon-alpha through interleukin-1 production in adult rat dentate gyrus.
Neuropsychopharmacology 31:2619–2626
28. Ishikawa J, Ishikawa A, Nakamura S (2007)
Interferon-alpha reduces the density of monoaminergic axons in the rat brain. Neuroreport
18:137–140
29. Anisman H et al (2007) Interferon-alpha effects
are exaggerated when administered on a psychosocial stressor backdrop: cytokine, corticosterone and brain monoamine variations.
J Neuroimmunol 186:45–53
30. Litteljohn D et al (2010) Interferon-gamma
deficiency modifies the effects of a chronic
stressor in mice: implications for psychological
pathology. Brain Behav Immun 24:462–473
31. Ling MM, Ricks C, Lea P (2007) Multiplexing
molecular diagnostics and immunoassays using
emerging microarray technologies. Expert Rev
Mol Diagn 7:87–98
32. Young HA (2009) Cytokine multiplex analysis.
Methods Mol Biol 511:85–105
33. Shi M, Caudle WM, Zhang J (2009) Biomarker
discovery in neurodegenerative diseases: a proteomic approach. Neurobiol Dis 35:157–164
34. Ellington AA et al (2010) Antibody-based protein multiplex platforms: technical and operational challenges. Clin Chem 56:186–193
35. Braeckmans K et al (2002) Encoding microcarriers: present and future technologies. Nat Rev
Drug Discov 1:447–456
36. Mangano EN, Hayley S (2009) Inflammatory
priming of the substantia nigra influences the
impact of later paraquat exposure: neuroimmune
sensitization of neurodegeneration. Neurobiol
Aging 30:1361–1378
37. Gibb J et al (2011) Effects of stressors and
immune activating agents on peripheral and
central cytokines in mouse strains that differ in
stressor responsivity. Brain Behav Immun
25:468–482

7

Cytokines as Potential Biomarkers for Parkinson’s Disease…

38. Luminex Corp (2010) Overcoming the cost
and performance limitations of ELISA with
xMAP technology. xMAP technology technical
note [white paper]. http://www.luminexcorp.
com/prod/groups/public/documents/
lmnxcorp/308-xmap-vs.-elisa-white-paper.pdf
39. Sista RS et al (2008) Heterogeneous immunoassays using magnetic beads on a digital
microfluidic platform. Lab Chip 8:2188–2196
40. Hartmann M et al (2009) Protein microarrays
for diagnostic assays. Anal Bioanal Chem
393:1407–1416
41. Luminex Corp (2010) Equivalent analytical
performance between the new MAGPIX system and the Luminex 100/200 system. xMAP
technology technical note [white paper).
h t t p : / / w w w. l u m i n e x c o r p . c o m / p r o d /
groups/public/documents/lmnxcorp/314magpix-vs-lx200-white-pape.pdf
42. Lash GE, Pinto LA (2010) Multiplex cytokine
analysis technologies. Expert Rev Vaccines
9:1231–1237
43. Wu G (2010) Assay development: fundamentals
and practices. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, pp 43–53
44. Fichorova RN et al (2008) Biological and technical variables affecting immunoassay recovery
of cytokines from human serum and simulated
vaginal fluid: a multicenter study. Anal Chem
80:4741–4751
45. Vistnes M, Christensen G, Omland T (2010)
Multiple cytokine biomarkers in heart failure.
Expert Rev Mol Diagn 10:147–157
46. Dupont NC et al (2005) Validation and comparison of luminex multiplex cytokine analysis
kits with ELISA: determinations of a panel of
nine cytokines in clinical sample culture supernatants. J Reprod Immunol 66:175–191
47. Djoba Siawaya JF et al (2008) An evaluation of
commercial fluorescent bead-based luminex
cytokine assays. PLoS One 3(7):e2535.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0002535
48. de Jager W et al (2009) Prerequisites for
cytokine measurements in clinical trials with
multiplex immunoassays. BMC Immunol
10:52. doi:10.1186/1471-2172-10-52
49. Elshal MF, McCoy JP (2006) Multiplex bead
array assays: performance evaluation and comparison of sensitivity to ELISA. Methods
38:317–323
50. Dossus L et al (2009) Validity of multiplexbased assays for cytokine measurements in
serum and plasma from “non-diseased” subjects: comparison with ELISA. J Immunol
Methods 350:125–132
51. Codorean E et al (2010) Correlation of XMAP
and ELISA cytokine profiles; development and

143

validation for immunotoxicological studies
in vitro. Roum Arch Microbiol Immunol
69:13–19
52. Dabitao D et al (2011) Multiplex measurement
of proinflammatory cytokines in human serum:
comparison of the Meso Scale Discovery electrochemiluminescence assay and the Cytometric
Bead Array. J Immunol Methods 372(1–2):71–
77. doi:10.1016/j.jim.2011.06.033
53. Fu Q, Zhu J, Van Eyk JE (2010) Comparison
of multiplex immunoassay platforms. Clin
Chem 56:314–318
54. Chowdhury F, Williams A, Johnson P (2009)
Validation and comparison of two multiplex
technologies,
Luminex
and
Mesoscale
Discovery, for human cytokine profiling.
J Immunol Methods 340:55–64
55. Hanley BP, Xing L, Cheng RH (2007) Variance
in multiplex suspension array assays: microsphere size variation impact. Theor Biol Med
Model 4:31. doi:10.1186/1742-4682-4-31
56. Breen EC et al (2011) Multisite comparison of
high-sensitivity multiplex cytokine assays. Clin
Vaccine Immunol 18:1229–1242
57. Nechansky A et al (2008) Comparison of the
calibration standards of three commercially
available multiplex kits for human cytokine
measurement to WHO standards reveals striking differences. Biomark Insights 3:227–235
58. Prabhakar U et al (2004) Validation and comparative analysis of a multiplexed assay for the
simultaneous quantitative measurement of Th1/
Th2 cytokines in human serum and human
peripheral blood mononuclear cell culture supernatants. J Immunol Methods 291:27–38
59. Master SR, Bierl C, Kricka LJ (2006) Diagnostic
challenges for multiplexed protein microarrays.
Drug Discov Today 11:1007–1011
60. Mollenhauer B et al (2011) α-Synuclein and
tau concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of
patients presenting with parkinsonism: a cohort
study. Lancet Neurol 10:230–240
61. Peterson AL, Nutt JG (2008) Treatment of
Parkinson’s disease with trophic factors.
Neurotherapeutics 5:270–280
62. Yasuda T, Mochizuki H (2010) Use of growth
factors for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Expert Rev Neurother 10:915–924
63. Visanji NP et al (2008) PYM50028, a novel,
orally active, nonpeptide neurotrophic factor
inducer, prevents and reverses neuronal damage
induced by MPP+ in mesencephalic neurons
and by MPTP in a mouse model of Parkinson’s
disease. FASEB J 22:2488–2497
64. Scully P et al (2010) Plasma cytokine profiles in
females with irritable Bowel syndrome and

144

D. Litteljohn and S. Hayley

extra-intestinal co-morbidity. Am J Gastroenterol
105:2235–2243
65. Ohman L, Simrén M (2010) Pathogenesis of
IBS: role of inflammation, immunity and neuroimmune interactions. Nat Rev Gastroenterol
Hepatol 7:163–173

66. Folks DG (2004) The interface of psychiatry
and irritable Bowel syndrome. Curr Psychiatry
Rep 6:210–215
67. Eller M, Williams DR (2009) Biological fluid
biomarkers in neurodegenerative parkinsonism.
Nat Rev Neurol 5:561–570

Chapter 8
Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker
Coexpression in Gulf War Illness
Gordon Broderick, Mary Ann Fletcher, Michael Gallagher,
Zachary Barnes, Suzanne D. Vernon, and Nancy G. Klimas
Abstract
Complex disorders like Gulf War Illness (GWI) often defy diagnosis on the basis of a single biomarker and
may only be distinguishable by considering the coexpression of multiple markers measured in response to
a challenge. We demonstrate the practical application of such an approach using an example where blood
was collected from 26 GWI, 13 healthy control subjects, and 9 unhealthy controls with Chronic Fatigue
at three points during a graded exercise challenge. A 3-way multivariate projection model based on 12
markers of endocrine and immune function was constructed using a training set of n = 10 GWI and n = 11
healthy controls. These groups were separated almost completely on the basis of two coexpression
patterns. In a separate test set these same features allowed for discrimination of new GWI subjects (n = 16)
from unhealthy (n = 9) and healthy control subjects with a sensitivity of 70% and a specificity of 90%.
Key words: Cytokine profile, Coexpression patterns, Exercise response, Gulf War Illness, Regression
model, Diagnostic classification, Partial least squares, Batch partial least squares

1. Introduction
Gulf War Illness (GWI) is a complex multisymptom illness of
unknown etiology associated with deployment to the Persian Gulf
between 1990 and 1991. Symptom presentation shows a strong
overlap with the case definition for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
(CFS) with 4.9% of the 693,826 Gulf War troops deployed satisfying the latter (1). Our work and the work of others strongly suggest that the pathogenesis of GWI and CFS includes both a
neuroendocrine (2–5) and an immunologic component (6–11).
Earlier work in this area has lead to debates over the pro-inflammatory
(12, 13) or anti-inflammatory (14, 15) nature of these disorders
and more recent results suggest that they may not fit easily into
either of these conventional descriptive categories.
Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_8, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

145

146

G. Broderick et al.

Common to the majority of existing studies is a focus on the
difference in expression of individual cytokines, hormones, and
neurotransmitters. Even though the nervous, endocrine, and
immune systems are highly integrated their biomarkers continue to
be analyzed individually leaving patterns of coordinated response
largely unexplored. In addition, investigations have focused on
immune status in patients at rest and have not sought to actively
probe the immune response. Used recently to investigate CFS
(16), exercise can be used to elicit a coordinated “fight or flight”
response in the nervous, endocrine and immune systems. We chose
a similar standardized exercise challenge to amplify immune and
neuroendocrine response in GWI patients (9–11, see Notes 1–3).
In an initial analysis of the data we found that the patterns of association linking immune and endocrine biomarkers differed very
significantly in GWI patients. Under effort a characteristic remodeling of the association network occurred around nodes for CD19+
B cell abundance, IL-5 and IL-6 responsiveness in culture as well
as soluble CD26 (11). Further analysis indicated that initial IL-1a
concentration and CD2+/CD26+ cell abundance strongly
influenced the course of this remodeling.
Though key in gaining new insight into the basic disease mechanisms of GWI, this type of analysis requires at least 15–30 samples
to support the mathematical assembly of association networks in
each illness group. Therefore with current technology such an
approach is impractical for use as a clinical assay for the diagnosis
of individual patients. Even though the association patterns linking
immune biomarkers differ from one illness group to the next, we
ask the inverse question in this work in order to reduce the sample
burden. Namely, is there a subset of associations shared somewhat
consistently by all subjects that might be preserved to a different
extent in GWI, vs. CFS and healthy controls? This question requires
much less data to answer making this yardstick a more plausible
tool to deploy in clinic. Constructing a multivariate statistical
model to capture patterns of change shared by various cytokines,
cortisol and neuropeptide Y (NPY) across the entire time course
we show that such patterns can indeed serve in distinguishing GWI
subjects from controls. More importantly, we formally test the
predictive performance of this approach using a separate validation
set where we show that cytokine patterns identified in the training
set also distinguish new GWI subjects from patients with CFS, an
illness with significant overlap in clinical presentation.

2. Materials
The use of multivariate statistical models in defining molecular
phenotypes for complex illness is the principal focus of this chapter.
The foundation for conducting such an analysis is a dataset consisting

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

147

of a large number of candidate biomarkers. In general these
biomarkers are substantially cross-correlated or partially redundant.
They will have been measured in samples collected from an appropriately recruited cohort of subjects (Subheading 2.1) assigned to
clinically relevant diagnostic groups using standard assessment
tools (Subheading 2.2). Typically samples of blood, saliva, or other
fluids will have been collected and analyzed using industry standard assays (Subheading 2.3).
2.1. A Standardized
Case Definition and
Psychometric Tools

In this example, subject inclusion criteria was derived from Fukuda
et al. (17), and consisted in identifying veterans deployed to the
theater of operations between August 8, 1990 and July 31, 1991,
with one or more symptoms present after 6 months from at least
two of the following: fatigue; mood and cognitive complaints; and
musculoskeletal complaints (joint pain, stiffness or muscle pain).
The suitability of the Fukuda definition for identifying GWI
patients is supported by the work of Collins et al. (18).
In support of the case definition psychometric questionnaires
used to assess illness severity included the Multidimensional Fatigue
Inventory (MFI) (19), a 20-item self-report instrument designed
to measure fatigue, and the Medical Outcomes Study 36-item
short-form survey (SF-36) (20) assessing health-related quality of
life. Typically all subjects also receive a physical examination and
provided a medical history including the GWI symptom checklist
as per the case definition.

2.2. Instruments
for Assessment of
Exercise Response

Considering the response to a physiological challenge can enhance
the expression of candidate biomarkers. In this case a Graded eXercise Test (GXT) was administered using a Vmax Spectra 29c
Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing Instrument, Sensor-Medics
Ergoline 800 fully automated cycle ergometer, and SensorMedics
Marquette MAX 1 Sress ECG (SensorMedics Corp., Yorba Linda,
CA).

2.3. Standard Assays
for Measuring Immune
Markers in Blood

The data used here to illustrate the identification of biomarkers
coexpression patterns is based on measurements of immune cell
signaling. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were
recovered from heparinized samples of whole blood and cultured
for 48 h with phytohemaglutinin at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Following
incubation, culture supernatants were collected and frozen at
−70 °C until analyzed for concentrations of IL-1a, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-10, TNFa, and IFNg. Levels of IL-6, IL-10, and TNFa were
also determined in plasma samples that were separated with 2 h,
stored at −70 °C and not thawed prior to analysis. In all cases
measurement was performed using commercial ELISA kits
(Immunotech, Miami, FL), quality-controlled using National
Institute for Biological Standards and Control/World Health
Organization cytokine reference standards. Plasma sCD26 was also

148

G. Broderick et al.

measured by ELISA (Bender Med Systems, Burlingame, CA) and
NPY was measured using a RIA from Alpco Diagnostics (Salem,
NH). Salivary cortisol was determined by immunoassay using the
Salimetrics high sensitivity kit (State College, PA). This measure
has been shown to correlate well with cortisol in blood during
exercise (21).
2.4. Computational
Tools
2.4.1. Standard
Hypothesis Tests

2.4.2. Multivariate
Regression Analysis

Differences in the expression of individual markers were assessed
using the nonparametric Wilcoxon rank sum test and the significance
of first-order trends was based on the Friedman test for repeated
measures. A parametric two-way ANOVA was also used to test for
the significance of group and time effects as well as the time-group
interaction effect. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. All
hypothesis testing was performed using the MatLab Statistics
Toolbox (MathWorks, Natick, MA).
In this example we used a projection to latent structures technique
(22, 23), also called partial least squares (PLS), to identify patterns
of cytokine coexpression that could classify GWI subjects. This
method enables the construction of A composite features each
consisting of different weighted sums of the original variables. Like
the basic model for principal component analysis (PCA) these A
features are computed for the input space X (Eq. 1) described by k
markers measured in n subjects. However in PLS composite
features are also computed simultaneously for an output space Y
(Eq. 2) described by m response markers measured in the same n
subjects. These composite features are defined by the loading
parameters P and C (Eqs. 1 and 2) that describe the contribution
of each variable to each feature. These loading parameters are then
adjusted iteratively by exchanging information between the new
feature spaces T and U with residual error H using the inner relation
in Eq. 3. This is done to maximize correspondence of the input
features with the features summarizing the responses. The objective is to identify a set of features that best capture the variability
in the input marker space X by controlling for residual error
E while also maximizing their relevance to the response variables Y by minimizing residual error F. The NIPALS algorithm
(nonlinear iterative partial least squares) (24) was used to solve for
the optimal set of parameter values in Eqs. 1, 2, and 3 presented
here in standard matrix form i.e., subscript being row dimension,
superscript being column dimension. Importantly these features
are computed with the constraint that they be mutually orthogonal
or statistically uncorrelated. This basic property supports the estimation of unbiased parameter estimates with minimal error and
the decomposition of output variability into fractions directly
assignable to each model component.
n

[X ]k =n [T ]A A [P ′]k +n [E ]k

(1)

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

n

149

[Y]m =n [U ]A A [C ′]m +n [F ]m

(2)

[U ]A =n [T ]A +n [H ]A

(3)

n

Here the objective of the analysis is to assign a subject to either
the GWI or the healthy control group on the basis of their profile
in 12 markers of neuroendocrine and immune function. This
requires a variant of PLS called PLS discriminant analysis (PLS-DA)
(25) where a dummy outcome variable Y is created that describes
membership to diagnostic class. In this case two such binary variables were created assigning membership yik of each subject i to the
control group k = 1 and the GWI group k = 2 respectively with
yik ∈ [0,1]. Each feature a £ A is expressed as a linear combination
of the original cytokine, hormone and neurotransmitter concentrations xk each weighted by a loading coefficient pka.
Uncertainty in the estimation of the feature weights expressed
in terms of their standard error was computed using leave-one-out
cross validation (26, 27) where the model is repeatedly estimated
with each subject omitted in turn. These multiple cross-validation
models provide populations of parameter estimates from which
significance may be estimated. For example the significance of the
difference between a feature score for two individual subjects was
based on the dispersion of score values obtained during crossvalidation for each subject.
All multivariate methods such as PCA, PLS, and partial least
squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) calculations were conducted with the SimcaP software (Umetrics, Kinnelon, NJ).
2.4.3. Statistical Tools
for Assessing the
Diagnostic Performance

Classification performance statistics and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were calculated using functions found in the
SPSS Statistics software package (IBM, Armonk, NY) and the
MatLab Statistics Toolbox software (MathWorks, Natick, MA).

3. Methods
The analysis that is the focus of this chapter is best described by
working through the following example involving the recruitment
and assessment of a suitable subject group (Subheading 3.1), the
measurement of a relevant physiological response (Subheading 3.2),
the collection and analysis of biological samples (Subheading 3.3),
and finally the identification and assessment of diagnostic markers
(Subheading 3.4, also see Notes 4–6).
Application of the above-mentioned tools, protocols, and
assays resulted in the creation of a dataset consisting of 58 human
subjects distributed across 3 diagnostic groups and both genders.
In the data subset of interest each subject was described by 12

150

G. Broderick et al.

markers of neuroendocrine and immune function assessed in
blood collected at three points in time during a standard exercise
challenge.
3.1. Recruitment
of a Study Cohort

In this example, a first subset of 10 GWI and 11 control subjects
described previously (9) were recruited from the Miami Veterans
Administration Medical Center and studied. Subjects were male
and ranged in age between 30 and 55. Subjects were in good health
prior to 1990, and had no current exclusionary diagnoses that
could reasonably explain the symptoms and their severity. Subjects
taking medications that may impact immune function were
excluded (e.g., steroids, immunosuppressive agents). Control
subjects consisted of Gulf War era sedentary veterans and were
matched to GWI subjects by age, gender, body mass index (BMI)
and ethnicity. Controls were also selected and matched to patients
on the basis of their general fitness level, estimated a priori from
their history of activity and confirmed during exercise challenge.
Consistent with these criteria and specific to this analysis a second
group was subsequently recruited consisting of an additional 16
male and 10 female GWI subjects as well as 9 male CFS subjects
and 2 new male control subjects. This new group of subjects was
used as a separate validation set in this example.

3.2. Applying Standard
Exercise Challenge

The McArdle protocol (28) for graded exercise was used to elicit
an immune-endocrine response. Subjects pedal at an initial output
of 60 W for 2 min, followed by an increase of 30 W every 2 min
until the subject reaches: (1) a plateau in maximal oxygen consumption (VO2); (2) a respiratory exchange ratio above 1.15; or
(3) the subject stops the test.

3.3. Sample Collection
and Analysis

Prior to the exercise challenge a first blood draw was conducted
after subjects sat quietly for 30 min. Second and third blood draws
were conducted upon reaching peak effort (VO2 max) and at 4-h
post exercise, respectively. At each blood draw, five 8-mL tubes of
blood were collected in CPT vacutainers (B-D-Biosciences, San
Jose, CA). Importantly, diurnal variations in this and other indicators were controlled by conducting assessments at the same time of
day for all subjects. Blood samples were processed and markers
recorded as described in Subheading 2.3.

3.4. Numerical Analysis

1. Calculate the change in median expression of each cytokine
occurring between the GWI and the healthy control subjects
and test for significance. A standard Mann–Whitney nonparametric test can be used for this purpose and applied at each
time point separately.
Although results presented in Table 1 suggest a general
over-expression of cytokines in the GWI group only a subset of
these achieved statistical significance. In particular we observed

3.4.1. Assessing Changes
in the Expression of
Individual Biomarkers

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

151

Table 1
Changes in the expression of signaling molecules in GWI
Signal molecule

GWI(t0) -Ctrl(t0)

GWI(t1) -Ctrl(t1) GWI(t2) -Ctrl(t2)

Saliva
Cortisol

0.13 (0.15)

−0.04 (0.49)

0.07 (0.06)

PHA-stimulated Blood Culture
IL-1a
−3.40 (0.66)
IL-5
81.00 (0.00)
IL-6
−111.00 (0.38)
IL-10
−19.00 (0.96)
TNFa
206.50 (0.05)
INFg
100.00 (0.07)

9.00 (0.95)
30.00 (0.00)
1185.50 (0.10)
-177.50 (0.42)
53.00 (0.68)
170.70 (0.02)

3.00 (0.68)
41.50 (0.00)
2398.50 (0.19)
269.50 (1.00)
167.50 (0.10)
158.20 (0.02)

Plasma
IL-6
IL-10
TNFa
sCD26
NPY

11.85 (0.03)
−3.10 (0.50)
−1.30 (0.95)
−12.00 (0.81)
3.95 (0.55)

9.50 (0.02)
−1.65 (0.43)
1.75 (0.21)
14.50 (0.86)
11.69 (0.97)

0.62 (0.01)
0.06 (0.86)

0.46 (0.00)
−0.31 (0.38)

10.75 (0.01)
−1.80 (0.27)
2.00 (0.49)
−85.50 (0.11)
−5.03 (0.65)

Composite Features
Level 1 Feature 1
0.39 (0.01)
Level 1 Feature 2 −0.01 (0.81)

Difference in median expression values (significance p-value, Mann–Whitney)
between GWI and healthy controls (Ctrl) prior to exercise (t0), at peak effort
(t1) and 4-h post-exercise (t2). PHA-stimulated ex vivo culture cytokines are
reported as pg/105 lymphocyte cells. All signals measured in plasma are
expressed in pg/mL. Salivary cortisol is reported in mg/dL

significantly higher response to PHA stimulation in GWI
subjects for IL-5 at all 3 sample times (p £ 0.001) and in IFNg
with challenge (p = 0.02, 0.02). Marginally higher TNF-a
responsiveness was also observed (p = 0.05) in PHA-stimulated
culture but only at rest (t0). This was accompanied by significantly
higher concentrations of IL-6 in plasma (p £ 0.03) both prior
to and throughout the challenge. Interestingly, no significant
differences were observed in salivary cortisol, NPY, and in ex
vivo-stimulated culture for IL-1, IL-6, and sCD26. The same
applies to IL-10 measured both in culture and in plasma.
2. Evaluate significance of trends in the expression of each marker
across time. The nonparametric Friedman test for repeated
measures and the standard 2-way ANOVA were used for this
purpose.
In this example the majority of significant trends were found in the
response of healthy control subjects. A systematic progression
across time was found for IL-1a (p = 0.01) and IL-5 (p = 0.05) in

152

G. Broderick et al.

PHA-stimulated culture for healthy controls as well as in the
expression of IL-10 in culture (p = 0.04) and in plasma (p = 0.05).
Similar exercise-induced changes in NPY (p £ 0.001) were also
observed. In comparison GWI subjects as a group displayed a lower
responsiveness to exercise. Only IL-5 concentrations in PHAstimulated culture showed any significant trend (p = 0.03) in GWI
and produced a significant group × time interaction effect based on
a parametric two-way ANOVA. Though trends in both salivary
cortisol (p = 0.06 controls; 0.15 GWI) and TNF-a (p = 0.10 controls; 0.08 GWI) failed significance under the Friedman test, results
from the two-way ANOVA showed a significant interaction of
diagnostic group with time for these markers (p = 0.04, 0.01).
3.4.2. Isolating Patterns of
Biomarker Coexpression

The nervous, immune, and endocrine systems are generally recognized as being highly integrated regulatory networks. As a result,
even though there were relatively few differences in the absolute
expression of individual markers, there may still be coregulatory
imbalances. Because the basic PLS algorithm described in
Subheading 2.4.2 can be applied to all data points independently
of sample time the dynamics of the immune response are not captured. To address this we applied a two-step analysis commonly
referred to as 3-way PLS or batch-PLS (29, 30). This model is
described in Fig. 1.

Fig. 1. PLS-DA classification model structure. Diagram of the input and output relationships defined at each level of the PLS
model for classification of subjects to the GWI or healthy control class.

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

153

1. First PLS was applied to all measurements across all individual
markers using sample time t as a response Y in level 1 of the
model (steps 1 and 2). This was done to enforce the sequence
of values when identifying the features that best described the
patterns of coexpression linking the 12 markers (X in level 1).
In a preprocessing step all regressor variables in the X block
were log transformed. Each log-transformed variable was then
scaled by dividing with the corresponding standard deviation
computed about zero instead of the mean. The response variable Y describing the progression of each batch or exercise
challenge was not transformed nor was it centered. To capture
the unequal spacing in time of the three observations made
during each trial we used an approximate time vector of [t0, t1,
t2] = [0, 30, 270] in minutes. In addition, the training set used
here contains roughly 8% missing array elements. Missing data
was handled implicitly by the NIPALS algorithm using an
extension to the original computation proposed by
Christoffersson (31) that consists essentially in iteratively substituting missing values with their model predictions. This
approximate method performs well with up to 10–20% missing data and has been implemented in the Simca software package mainly because of its rapid and robust convergence
properties. A comparison with alternate approaches more
suitable for higher fractions of missing data may be found in
Grung and Manne (32).
In the current example each sample is described by 12 biomarkers, 6 of which were measured in culture, 5 in plasma and
one in saliva. This level 1 analysis produced a base model supported by 2 significant features that captured approximately
89% of the total variability (Rx2 = 0.89) in the data (Table 2).

Table 2
PLS model fit and structure
Model

Component a R2X

R2X(cum) Eigenvalues R2Y

R2Y(cum) Q2

Q2(cum)

Level 1 Model
Observations (N)=69
K=12 Biomarkers
vs Time

1
2

0.83 0.83
0.07 0.89

9.91
0.81

0.40 0.40
0.06 0.46

0.40 0.40
0.04 0.42

Level 2 Model
Observations (N)=21
2 Level-1 features at
3 times (K=6)

1
2

0.53 0.53
0.32 0.85

3.19
1.93

0.38 0.38
0.09 0.46

0.33 0.33
0.04 0.36

R2x and R2y are Pearson correlation coefficients or total sum of squared regression (SSR) captured by the
partial least squares (PLS) model for the regressor X (molecular signals) and predicted variable Y (diagnostic class) spaces respectively. The value Q2 = 1-PRESS/SST expresses overall model performance in terms
of reduction in the predicted residual sum of squared errors (PRESS) in leave-one-out cross validation

154

G. Broderick et al.

Fig. 2. Structure of composite features. The relative contribution pka of each biomarker k to each of the two level-1 model
features (a = 1, 2) that optimally separate the subjects into their respective diagnostic groups. The first feature captures a
broad-spectrum disturbance across all biomarkers. The second feature captures a pattern of co-expression whereby
increases in IL-1a are offset by a corresponding increase in cortisol, IL-6, and IL-10. Whiskers represent the standard error
in estimation for each weight pka. All level-1 feature 1 weights are significant at p £ 0.001. Only the feature 2 weights for
cortisol ( p £ 0.001), IL-1a ( p = 0.024), IL-6 ( p = 0.008) and IL-10 (p £ 0.001) were significant at p < 0.05.

The contribution of each biomarker to these features is shown
in Fig. 2. Accounting for 82% of the variability, the first feature
described a broad-spectrum response to exercise. Expression
of NPY and cytokines measured in plasma as well as in ex vivo
culture all correlated positively with one another and negatively with salivary cortisol. Accounting for 7% of the overall
variability, a second pattern was defined by the coexpression of
salivary cortisol, IL-6, and IL-10 in plasma and an opposite
IL-1a response in culture.
2. Features identified in step 1 are then used to define a new input
array for level 2 of the analysis. At level 2 the input variables to
the classification model were the scores Ta(t,i) in each feature a
evaluated for each subject i at each time point t in step 1 of the
analysis namely T1(t0,i), T1(t1,i), T1(t2,i), T2(t0,i), T2(t1,i),
T2(t2,i). These feature scores were not transformed and were
scaled to unit variance before estimation of the level-2 model.
PLS-DA was then applied (see Subheading 2.4.2) to manage
the temporal relationships linking feature scores at each sample

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

155

point in this new level-2 feature space. Because PLS-DA carries
information about the diagnostic classes, the time course
features extracted in level 2 are those that provide optimal
discrimination of GWI patients from the control subjects.
This second step produces a set of level-2 features each
consisting of weighted sums in T1(t0,i), T1(t1,i), T1(t2,i),
T2(t0,i), T2(t1,i), T2(t2,i). In this way the full time course in
each coexpression pattern (T1 and T2) identified in level 1 is
captured for each subject. Moreover by weighting individual
elements of the time course it is possible to emphasize or
diminish the contribution of a level-1 score at specific phases
of the challenge. Scores produced at level 2 of the analysis
now summarize for each subject the complete progression
across all time points for all 12 markers. The position of a
subject’s profile in this new level-2 feature space is then used
by the PLS-DA model to predict a degree of membership to
the GWI illness class.
In this example two level-2 features were identified, each
summarizing almost exclusively the corresponding time course
from the first level of the model. The progression in time of all
12 markers for each subject may now be expressed in terms of
only two level-2 scores (Fig. 3). Together they summarized
roughly 85% of the variation across time of both level-1 features (Table 2). They also captured close to half of the total
variability in diagnostic class membership (Ry2 = 0.46) even
though a relatively narrow assessment of immune function was
used. Leave-one-out cross-validation indicated that this model
was also reasonably robust in predicting diagnostic class for
data excluded from model fitting (Q2 = 0.36). Close to 40% of
variability in class membership was accounted for by broadspectrum changes across time (feature 1). Another 9% was captured by the progression in feature 2. Interestingly this
sequential set of scores contributed positively to the classification
model’s performance (Q2 = 0.04) even though no statistically
significant separation of individual median values was found
for feature 2. This underscores the fact that feature 2 as computed in the PLS regression model adds important detail to
feature 1 and should be used in conjunction with the latter.
3. Using model cross validation as an estimate of variability in
individual time course profiles we can now compare one subject to another on the basis of changes in level-1 patterns across
time.
To illustrate this we compared the progression of level-1 feature
scores in a case-matched (age, BMI and % of predicted maximum
VO2) pair of GWI patients and healthy controls: CS201 and PC
105 (Fig. 4a, b). While these subjects separate on the basis of
feature 1 alone, controlling for other sources of variability by comparing a matched pair now reveals significant differences in feature

156

G. Broderick et al.

Fig. 3. Separation of subjects in feature space. Distribution of GWI and control subjects in a feature space defined by the
co-expression of 12 biomarkers of neuroendocrine-immune status. Each axis is defined by a specific linear combination
of biomarkers and the evolution in these patterns over the course of a graded exercise challenge. Each point captures the
entire time course recorded for that subject. In this feature space 4 of 11 control subjects appear to group with the 10 GWI
subjects.

2 especially at peak effort (t1) (p = 0.05). Examination of the level-2
classification model revealed that the contribution of feature 2
scores at time t1 were weighted an order of magnitude higher
(0.180 t1) than those at time t0 and t2 (0.016 t0, 0.017 t2). In
fact only at t1 were feature 2 scores weighted similarly to those
for feature 1 (0.278 t0, 0.227 t1, 0.299 t2).
The important detail added by feature 2 can also be visualized
further by comparing two individuals who share very similar feature
1 scores: GWI subject VR 203 and control subject CC 104. Though
these individuals share a very similar broad-spectrum baseline
immune activation (feature 1), they differ dramatically in their
expression of feature 2 scores across time (Fig. 4c, d). Both these
examples and the structure of the classification model suggest that
differences in feature 2 score, in particular at peak effort, may be of

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

157

Fig. 4. Evolution of feature scores in time for matched pairs. Median expression of level-1 feature 1 (a) and feature 2 (b)
prior to exercise (t0), at peak effort (t1) and 4-h post-exercise (t2) are shown in (a, b) for GWI subject CS 201 (blue
diamonds ) and case matched control subject PC 105 (red squares ). (c, d) Shows data for GWI subject VR 203 (blue diamonds )
and control subject CC 104 (red squares ). Error bars display the median absolute deviation from median as computed from
repeated cross-validation for these observations. In (a, b) time and illness effects can be seen in both level-1 feature 1 and
feature 2. Significant deviations at peak effort in feature 2 illustrate why this time point is highly weighted in the level-2
model. In (c, d) we observe significant time effects in level-1 feature 1 and while illness results in a persistent offset in the
expression of feature 2.

specific diagnostic value and that this contribution may be obscured
by high within group dispersion. Interestingly feature 2 scores summarized at level 2 of the model correlated significantly with differences in physical fatigue (p < 0.01) and to a lesser extent general
fatigue (p = 0.06) among GWI subjects but not in control subjects
(p = 0.38, 0.11 respectively). No significant correlation with either
physical or general fatigue was found in GWI for feature 1 (p = 0.27,
0.85). In contrast while these were borderline significant in healthy
controls (p = 0.05, 0.05). This would suggest that feature 2 might
serve as an indicator of relative illness severity in GWI.
3.4.3. Exercise Response
as a Basis for Classification

To assess classifier performance the continuous scale for class
membership can be transformed to a discrete class assignment by

158

G. Broderick et al.

Fig. 5. Linear classifier performance. Receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curves for a
linear discriminant model constructed from cytokine, NPY and cortisol co-expression in 10
GWI and 11 male control subjects. Sensitivity and specificity of classification obtained at
various membership threshold values is presented for the original training set as well as
for a validation test set consisting of 9 male CFS patients as well as 16 new GWI and 2
new male control cases.

applying a membership threshold. Detection sensitivity and assignment specificity values can then be computed using these binary
assignments. This is repeated over a range of threshold values to
produce a receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve (33).
1. In this example separate receiver-operator characteristic (ROC)
curves were computed for classification using the broad-spectrum disturbance alone (feature 1) as well as classification including the inflammatory imbalance pattern (feature 2) (Fig. 5,
Table 3). Both classifiers performed similarly on the training set
of 10 male GWI and 11 male healthy control subjects each producing an area under the curve (AUC) significantly better than
random assignment (p = 0.001 Table 3). Nonetheless, at 85%
specificity the use of both features delivers a sensitivity of 90%
rather than 70% possible with one feature alone.
2. Performance differences became very noticeable when these
models were applied to a test set. Our first validation set

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

159

Table 3
Receiver-operator characteristics (ROC)
for PLS-DA classifiers
Asymptotic
95% Conf. Int.
Model

Data set

Positive:Negative

Area under Std.
Asymptotic Upper Lower
curve
Error(a) Sig.(b)
Bound Bound

Feature 1
Only

Training set

10 : 11 ctrl

0.900

0.064

0.001

0.774

1.026

Feature 1
and 2

Training set

10 : 11 ctrl

0.900

0.065

0.001

0.772

1.028

Feature 1
Only

Test set (male 16 : 9 CFS, 2 ctrl
only)

0.646

0.122

0.234

0.407

0.885

Feature 1
and 2

Test set (male 16 : 9 CFS, 2 ctrl
only)

0.750

0.110

0.042

0.534

0.966

Feature 1
Only

Test set (male 26 (incl. 10 female): 0.615
and female)
9 CFS, 2 ctrl

0.117

0.308

0.387

0.844

Feature 1
and 2

Test set (male 26 (incl. 10 female): 0.679
and female)
9 CFS, 2 ctrl

0.113

0.113

0.458

0.901

Detailed statistics for receiver-operator curves (ROC) describing the sensitivity as a function of 1-specificity
obtained in classification models based on partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). These
include the area under the curve (AUC) with the associated standard error of estimation, the corresponding
significance p-value as well as the upper and lower confidence limits at the 0.05 significance level. Statistics
are reported for classification in the training set, a male only test set and a mixed gender seta. Under the
nonparametric assumption
a
Under the nonparametric assumption
b
Null hypothesis: true area = 0.5

consisted of 16 new male GWI subjects, 9 male CFS controls,
and 2 new male healthy controls. The corresponding ROC
curves for the 1- and 2-feature classifiers are shown in Fig. 5.
When tested on these new male subjects, classification using
only the first feature does not differ significantly from a random assignment (p = 0.23 AUC). Inclusion of the second feature delivered a significant increase in AUC (p = 0.04 Table 3)
with 90% specificity available at 70% sensitivity. Recall that the
training set contained only male GWI and control subjects. To
test the impact of gender we constructed a second validation
set by adding ten female GWI cases to the first set. Classification
performance decreased drastically. Neither model performed
better than random assignment although two features were
still preferable (p = 0.11) to one (p = 0.31) (Table 3).
3. We intentionally included CFS subjects in the validation set as
a disease control group since CFS is clinically similar to GWI.
Using the ROC analysis performed on the training set we

160

G. Broderick et al.

choose a predicted membership threshold of 0.35 above which
we assigned a given case to the GWI group. This corresponded
in the training set to a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of
70% or the correct assignment of 7 of 11 healthy controls and
all 10 GWI subjects. Among the GWI test cases, we found correct assignment of 11 out of 16 male cases but only 3 of 10
female cases. With regard to the CFS control subjects, only
two of nine subjects were classified as GWI with the other
seven classified correctly as non-GWI. Recall that no CFS controls were used to train this classifier. Therefore these patterns
of immune marker coexpression appear reasonably specific to
GWI in male patients even when presented with clinically similar CFS subjects.

4. Notes
1. In recent work (11) we demonstrated that while the expression
of individual immune and endocrine markers provides some
diagnostic information in the study of GWI, the patterns
through which these markers coordinate their expression offer
significant new insight into this illness. Indeed while relatively
few individual markers changed significantly in expression, the
coexpression network linking these markers underwent
widespread changes in organization and structure in GWI.
2. While structural changes in the patterns of biomarker coexpression offer a highly discriminatory fingerprint the sample
burden required for identifying these changes in individual
patients is substantial and an alternative method must be
considered if molecular phenotyping is to be deployed clinically.
Here we have attempted to identify a subset of immune marker
associations that are preserved across all subjects but might be
expressed to a different extent and perhaps in a different direction
in GWI patients. We have also focused on linear interactions to
make the problem even more tractable.
3. The analysis presented here identified two such shared patterns
linking 12 immune mediators measured in blood and saliva.
The majority of GWI subjects separated from healthy controls
on the basis of a common trend whereby a higher than
expected expression of most immune markers coincided with
a lower than expected concentration of salivary cortisol (feature 1). As reported previously (11) this broad-spectrum
response included the joint over-expression of individual
inflammatory markers, Th1 and Th2 cytokines namely IL-6 in
plasma as well as IL-5, TNF-a, and INF-g in PHA-stimulated
culture. Recent evidence suggests that sensitization with a

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

161

foreign antigen mimicking self can induce a similar mixed
Th2/Th1 cytokine profile (34). Human proteins with structural similarity to exogenous allergens can cross-react with
allergen-specific IgE antibodies, inducing sustained
inflammation and lymphocyte proliferation (35–38). Among
these Hom s 2 (37) and Hom s 4 (36) are known to induce
IgE reactivity as well as a strong IFN-g response.
4. While an offset in baseline immune status (feature 1) was
sufficient to identify most GWI subjects, a subset of these could
not be distinguished on this basis alone. This subset supported
the identification of a second coexpression pattern (feature 2).
This pattern suggests that GWI subjects might differ from
controls in their acute-phase regulation of cortisol, IL-6,
IL-10, and possibly TNFa. This was accompanied by an altered
lymphocyte IL-1a responsiveness to PHA stimulation, a
cytokine associated with “sickness behavior” (39). Because of
the high degree of heterogeneity in this preliminary cohort,
differences in this second coexpression pattern achieved
significance only in case-matched GWI and control subjects.
This was especially true at peak effort where the contribution
of feature 2 was significantly weighted.
5. Though subtle, small changes in feature 2 were nonetheless
instrumental in maintaining high specificity and sensitivity in
the classification of new test subjects with GWI as well as subjects suffering from CFS (90% specificity and 70% sensitivity).
Interestingly this signature involves important myokines,
metabolically active cytokines, such as IL-6 and TNF-a with
key roles in energy metabolism. IL-6 has been called a true
“exercise factor” as levels of this cytokine increase exponentially
up to 100-fold during exercise (40). This is generally followed
by a compensatory expression of the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 and cortisol. The release of cortisol is also
mediated in part by IL-6 via feedback to the HPA axis (41).
Independent of this, IL-6 is known to activate one of the principal regulators of cellular energy status: the AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) pathway. IL-6 has also been recently
reported to have an insulin-sensitizing effect (42–44).
Conversely increases in TNFa promote insulin resistance (45)
and expression of this cytokine is inhibited by IL-6 (46).
Availability of metabolic energy stores therefore relies at least
in part on a balance of these hormones and cytokines.
In this respect it was interesting to note that subjects with
CFS, another fatiguing illness, did not manifest this pattern of
cytokine coexpression to the same extent as GWI subjects.
Indeed only 2 of the 9 CFS controls were assigned to the GWI
group by the classification model. Consequently even though
metabolic repercussions may be similar, the basic mechanisms

162

G. Broderick et al.

driving neuroendocrine-immune dysfunction might be quite
different in GWI and these illnesses may constitute very distinct regulatory regimes (47).
6. Though our results appear to extrapolate well to new subjects
in a separate validation cohort the overall number of subjects
examined remains relatively small. Therefore we suggest this
analysis be considered preliminary even though the group size
is consistent with that used recently in related studies (4, 5). In
addition the panel of cytokines used was relatively narrow and
by no means constituted a complete survey of the immune
response. In recognition of this a simple linear classification
model was chosen as a more conservative approach to guard
against over-fitting the data.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the NIAAA: R21AA016635
(PI MA Fletcher); NIAID: R01AI065723 (PI MA Fletcher);
CFIDS Assoc. of America (2): (PI N Klimas, PI G Broderick);
NIAID: UO1 AI459940 (PI N Klimas); NIAMSD R01 AR05785301A1 (PI N Klimas); VA merit awards (PI N Klimas); Dynamic
Modeling in GWI,CFS/ME; GW080152 (PI N Klimas), and the
University of Alberta (PI G Broderick).
References
1. Kang HK, Natelson BH, Mahan CM et al
(2003) Post-traumatic stress disorder and
chronic fatigue syndrome-like illness among
Gulf War veterans: a population-based survey
of 30,000 veterans. Am J Epidemiol 157:
141–148
2. Unwin C, Blatchley N, Coker W et al (1999)
Health of UK servicemen who served in Persian
Gulf War. Lancet 353:169–178
3. Crofford LJ, Young EA, Engleberg NC et al
(2004) Basal circadian and pulsatile ACTH and
cortisol secretion in patients with fibromyalgia
and/or chronic fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav
Immun 18:314–325
4. Golier JA, Schmeidler J, Legge J et al (2006)
Enhanced cortisol suppression to dexamethasone associated with Gulf War deployment. Psychoneuroendocrinology 31(10):
1181–1189
5. Golier JA, Schmeidler J, Legge J et al (2007)
Twenty-four hour plasma cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone in Gulf War veterans:
relationships to posttraumatic stress disorder

and health symptoms. Biol Psychiatry 62(10):
1175–1178
6. Maher K, Klimas NG, Fletcher MA (2003)
Immunology. In: Jason LA, Fennell PA, Taylor
RR (eds) Handbook of chronic fatigue syndrome. Wiley, Hoboken, pp 124–151
7. Vojdani A, Thrasher JD (2004) Cellular and
humoral immune abnormalities in Gulf War
veterans. Environ Health Perspect 112(8):
840–846
8. Siegel SD, Antoni MH, Fletcher MA et al
(2006) Impaired natural immunity, cognitive
dysfunction, and physical symptoms in patients
with chronic fatigue syndrome: preliminary
evidence for a subgroup? J Psychosom Res
60(6):559–566
9. Whistler T, Fletcher MA, Lonergan W et al
(2009) Impaired immune function in Gulf War
illness. BMC Med Genomics 2:12
10. Broderick G, Fuite J, Kreitz A et al (2010) A
formal analysis of cytokine networks in chronic
fatigue syndrome. Brain Behav Immun 24(7):
1209–1217

8

Exploring the Diagnostic Potential of Immune Biomarker Coexpression…

11. Broderick G, Kreitz A, Fuite J et al (2011) A
pilot study of immune network remodeling
under challenge in Gulf War illness. Brain
Behav Immun 25(2):302–313
12. Moss RB, Mercandetti A, Vojdani A (1999)
TNF-alpha and chronic fatigue syndrome.
J Clin Immunol 19(5):314–316
13. Gaab J, Rohleder N, Heitz V et al (2005) Stressinduced changes in LPS-induced proinflammatory
cytokine production in chronic fatigue syndrome.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 30:188–198
14. Skowera A, Cleare A, Blair D et al (2004) High
levels of type 2 cytokine-producing cells in
chronic fatigue syndrome. Clin Exp Immunol
135(2):294–302
15. ter Wolbeek M, van Doornen LJ, Kavelaars A
et al (2007) Longitudinal analysis of pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokine production in
severely fatigued adolescents. Brain Behav
Immun 21(8):1063–1074
16. Light AR, White AT, Hughen RW et al (2009)
Moderate exercise increases expression for sensory, adrenergic, and immune genes in chronic
fatigue syndrome patients but not in normal
subjects. J Pain 10(10):1099–1112
17. Fukuda K, Nisenbaum R, Stewart G et al
(1998) Chronic multisymptom illness affecting
air force veterans of the Gulf War. JAMA
280:981–988
18. Collins JF, Donta ST, Engel CC et al (2002)
The antibiotic treatment trial of Gulf War
Veterans’ Illnesses: issues, design, screening,
and baseline characteristics. Control Clin Trials
23(3):333–353
19. Smets EM, Garssen B, Bonke B et al (1995)
The multidimensional fatigue inventory (MFI)
psychometric qualities of an instrument to assess
fatigue. J Psychosom Res 39(3):315–325
20. Ware JE Jr, Sherbourne CD (1992) The MOS
36-item short-form health survey (SF-36). I.
Conceptual framework and item selection. Med
Care 30(6):473–483
21. Cadore E, Lhullier F, Brentano M et al (2008)
Correlations between serum and salivary hormonal concentrations in response to resistance
exercise. J Sports Sci 26(10):1067–1072
22. Wold S, Trygg J, Berglund A et al (2001) Some
recent developments in PLS modeling.
Chemom Intell Lab Syst 58:131–149
23. Eriksson L, Antti H, Gottfries J et al (2004)
Using chemometrics for navigating in the large
data sets of genomics, proteomics, and metabonomics (gpm). Anal Bioanal Chem
380(3):419–429
24. Wold S, Esbensen K, Geladi P (1987) Principal
component analysis. Chemom Intell Lab Syst
2:37–52

163

25. Barker M, Rayens W (2003) Partial least squares
for discrimination. J Chemom 17(3):166–173
26. Efron B, Gong G (1983) A leisurely look at the
bootstrap, the jackknife, and cross-validation.
Am Stat 37:36–48
27. Krzanowski WJ (1987) Cross-validation in
principal component analysis. Biometrics 43:
575–584
28. McArdle WD, Katch FI, Katch VL (2007)
Exercise physiology: energy, nutrition, and
human performance. Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, London, p 954
29. Wold S, Kettaneh N, Friden H et al (1998)
Modelling and diagnostics of batch processes
and analogous kinetic experiments. Chemom
Intell Lab Syst 44:331–340
30. Antti H, Bollard ME, Ebbels T et al (2002)
Batch statistical processing of H-1 NMRderived urinary spectral data. J Chemom 16:
461–468
31. Christoffersson A (1970) The one component
model with incomplete data. Ph.D. thesis,
Uppsala University
32. Grung B, Manne R (1998) Missing values in
principal component analysis. Chemom Intell
Lab Syst 42:125–139
33. Greiner M, Pfeiffer D, Smith RD (2000)
Principles and practical application of the
receiver-operating characteristic analysis for
diagnostic tests. Prev Vet Med 45(1–2):23–41
34. Bünder R, Mittermann I, Herz U et al (2004)
Induction of autoallergy with an environmental
allergen mimicking a self protein in a murine
model of experimental allergic asthma. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 114(2):422–428
35. Fedorov AA, Ball T, Mahoney NM et al (1997)
The molecular basis for allergen cross-reactivity: crystal structure and IgE-epitope mapping
of birch pollen profilin. Structure 5(1):33–45
36. Aichberger KJ, Mittermann I, Reininger R et al
(2005) Hom s 4, an IgE-reactive autoantigen
belonging to a new subfamily of calcium-binding proteins, can induce Th cell type 1-mediated autoreactivity. J Immunol 175(2):
1286–1294
37. Mittermann I, Reininger R, Zimmermann M
et al (2008) The IgE-reactive autoantigen
Hom s 2 induces damage of respiratory epithelial cells and keratinocytes via induction of
IFN-gamma. J Invest Dermatol 128(6):
1451–1459
38. Valenta R, Mittermann I, Werfel T et al (2009)
Linking allergy to autoimmune disease. Trends
Immunol 30(3):109–116
39. Dantzer R, O’Connor JC, Freund GG et al
(2008) From inflammation to sickness and
depression: when the immune system subjugates

164

G. Broderick et al.

the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 9(1):46–56.
Review
40. Pedersen BK, Akerström TC, Nielsen AR et al
(2007) Role of myokines in exercise and
metabolism. J Appl Physiol 103(3):1093–1098.
Review
41. Steensberg A, Fischer CP, Keller C et al (2003)
IL-6 enhances plasma IL-1ra, IL-10, and cortisol in humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
285(2):E433–E437
42. Carey AL, Steinberg GR, Macaulay SL et al
(2006) Interleukin-6 increases insulin-stimulated glucose disposal in humans and glucose
uptake and fatty acid oxidation in vitro via
AMP-activated protein kinase. Diabetes
55(10):2688–2697
43. Choy EH, Isenberg DA, Garrood T et al
(2002) Therapeutic benefit of blocking interleukin-6 activity with an anti-interleukin-6
receptor monoclonal antibody in rheumatoid

arthritis: a randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, dose-escalation trial. Arthritis
Rheum 46(12):3143–3150
44. Wallenius V, Wallenius K, Ahrén B et al (2002)
Interleukin-6-deficient mice develop matureonset obesity. Nat Med 8(1):75–79
45. Plomgaard P, Bouzakri K, Krogh-Madsen R
et al (2005) Tumor necrosis factor-alpha
induces skeletal muscle insulin resistance in
healthy human subjects via inhibition of Akt
substrate 160 phosphorylation. Diabetes
54(10):2939–2945
46. Starkie R, Ostrowski SR, Jauffred S et al (2003)
Exercise and IL-6 infusion inhibit endotoxininduced TNF-alpha production in humans.
FASEB J 17(8):884–886
47. Ben-Zvi A, Vernon SD, Broderick G (2009)
Model-based therapeutic correction of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysfunction.
PLoS Comput Biol 5(1):e1000273

Chapter 9
Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure
Jessica A. Jiménez and Paul J. Mills
Abstract
Heart failure (HF) is a major and costly public health concern, and its prognosis is grim—with high
hospitalization and mortality rates. It is well documented that HF patients experience disproportionately
high rates of depression and that depressed HF patients have worse clinical outcomes than their nondepressed counterparts. The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the reader to the study of depression
in HF, and how psychoneuroimmunologic principals have been applied to further elucidate the mechanisms (i.e., neurohormonal and cytokine activation) linking these co-morbid disorders.
Key words: Heart failure, Depression, Inflammation, Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
Sympathetic nervous system

1. Introduction
Heart failure (HF) is a major public health concern, especially in
societies where a sizable proportion of the population is over 65
years of age. HF is often the last stage of cardiovascular disease,
and its prognosis is grim—with high hospitalization and mortality
rates. Interestingly, heart disease, including HF, is often accompanied by a psychological symptom complex, including low mood,
hostility, anger, and poor quality of life (1).
In recent years, the study of depression in HF has garnered
scientific interest due to its high prevalence in HF patients and its
strong tendency to worsen medical prognosis (1–4). Although the
etiology of depression in HF remains unclear, the disorders appear
to share a similar pathogenesis, involving disturbance of the balance between sympathetic and parasympathetic tone, and increased
inflammation, as evidenced by elevated circulating levels of
proinflammatory cytokines (2). Considering that depression has
also been associated with incident HF (5, 6), most scholars favor

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_9, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

165

166

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

a bidirectional pathophysiology, in which depression may precede
or follow the development of HF.
The purpose of this chapter is to introduce the reader to the
study of depression in HF, and how psychoneuroimmunologic
principals have been applied to further elucidate the mechanisms
linking these co-morbid disorders. We begin the chapter with a
brief discussion of the epidemiology and pathophysiology of HF,
then of the characteristics and consequences of depression in HF, and
conclude with discussion and presentation of relevant psychoneuroimmunological findings concerning the shared pathophysiology
of depression and HF.

2. Heart Failure
2.1. Epidemiology
of Heart Failure

In the United States, the prevalence of HF is 2.42%, with higher
rates found in older, male adults (7, 8). Despite significant advances
in treatment, the prognosis for patients remains grim: 20–30% of
HF patients die within a year of diagnosis, and 45–60% die within
5 years (9). Among older adults, HF is the most common condition for hospitalization (10), with 990,000 hospitalizations per
year in the US (8) at an approximate cost of $39.2 billion (11).

2.2. Definition
and Classification
of Heart Failure

The American College of Cardiology (ACC) and American Heart
Association (AHA) define HF as a complex clinical syndrome that
can result from any structural or functional cardiac disorder that
impairs the ability of the ventricles to fill with or eject blood (12).
The upper chambers of the heart are composed of the right and left
atria, and the lower chambers include the right and left ventricles.
The ventricles are muscular chambers that contract to pump blood
(systole). After systole, the ventricle muscles normally relax during
diastole, allowing blood from the atria to fill the ventricles. The
heart’s ability to pump can be compromised via two mechanisms:
(1) reduction in the volume of oxygenated blood ejected from the
left ventricle (LV) as a result of diminished myocardial contractility; and (2) inadequate venous return to heart, resulting from
impaired ventricle filling and relaxation.
Although HF varies in its etiologies and clinical features, it can
be broadly classified into two categories: HF with systolic dysfunction (also known as “HF with reduced ejection fraction” (HFrEF)),
characterized by a reduced left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF),
which is a measure of the percentage of blood that is ejected from
the heart into the aorta with each systole; HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) is a complex disorder, where LVEF is normal
or mildly abnormal. Other LV abnormalities include abnormal
relaxation and filling, concentric remodeling, hypertrophy, increased

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

167

Table 1
Functional classifications and disease progression stages of heart failure
Definition
New York Heart Association functional (NYHA) classes
NYHA class I
No limitation of physical activity

NYHA class II

Slight limitation of physical activity

NYHA class III

Marked limitation of physical activity

NYHA class IV

Unable to carry out any physical
activity without discomfort

Examples
Ordinary physical activity does not
cause undue fatigue, palpitation, or
dyspnea (shortness of breath)
Comfortable at rest, but ordinary
physical activity results in fatigue,
palpitation, or dyspnea
Comfortable at rest, but less than
ordinary activity causes fatigue,
palpitation, or dyspnea
Symptoms of cardiac insufficiency at
rest. If any physical activity is
undertaken, discomfort is increased

American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Stages of Heart Failure
Stage A
High risk for developing HF, but
Hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
without structural heart disease or
CAD, family history of
symptoms of HF
cardiomyopathy
Stage B
Structural heart disease, but
Previous myocardial infarction, left
asymptomatic
ventricular dysfunction, valvular
heart disease
Stage C
Structural heart disease with
Structural heart disease, dyspnea and
previous or current symptoms, but
fatigue, impaired exercise tolerance
managed with medical treatment
Stage D
Marked symptoms at rest despite
Advanced disease requiring hospitalmaximal medical therapy
based support, a heart transplant or
palliative care

extracellular matrix, abnormal relaxation and filling, decreased
diastolic distensibility, and abnormal calcium handling.
There are two primary scales that are used to classify HF. The
New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional scale, which is
based on symptoms, classifies HF in categories from I to IV
(Table 1).
The other scale is the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association (ACC/AHA) scale, a newer classification that
stages patients as either A, B, C, or D (Table 1) (12). The ACC/
AHA staging system classifies HF as a progressive disease, and once
a particular stage is reached there is no opportunity to transition to
a lower stage (e.g., a stage C HF patient cannot return to stage B).
This system is often complemented by the NYHA functional
classification system. In contrast, ACC/AHA Stage C patients can
shift between Functional Classes I–IV at any given time. Movement
up and down NYHA classes is common, depending on the clinical
status of the patient during the time of assessment.

168

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

3. Pathophysiology
of Heart Failure
HF is characterized by activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system (RAAS) and the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), as well
as inflammatory pathways. Regardless of its etiology and
classification, HF begins with injury to the myocardium (e.g.,
myocardial infarction), which reduces cardiac output. In response,
the body engages in a series compensatory mechanisms, including:
(1) maintaining perfusion pressure by increasing the circulation of
blood volume; (2) activating immune and inflammatory pathways;
and (3) restructuring cardiac muscle cells and reshaping the ventricle chamber. This systematic response involves complex interactions between the RAAS and SNS, which are collectively referred
to as neurohormonal responses.
Neurohormonal activation and cytokine activation are designed
for acute responses to injury, but prolonged activation of these
compensatory mechanisms eventually leads to further declines in
cardiac functioning. Currently, the most successful pharmacological therapies for HF block aspects of the body’s compensatory
responses to myocardial injury (12); thus, there is increasing
scientific interest in understanding neurohormonal and cytokine
activation in the context of HF.
3.1. ReninAngiotensinAldosterone System

The RAAS system maintains renal blood flow after the myocardium has sustained injury via its effects on remodeling the vasculature and increasing plasma volume. Decreased renal perfusion
pressure results in secretion of renin by juxtaglometer cells lining
the afferent renal arterioles. Specifically, renin cleaves angiotensinogen to form decapeptide angiotensin-I. The angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) cleaves two C terminal amino acids to form
angiotensin-II, the primary effector of the system. Receptors for
angiotensin-II are divided into subtypes, AT-1 and AT2. AT-1 is
the predominate subtype in the vascular endothelium and a primary target for pharmacologic blockade. Binding of angiotensin-II
to AT-1 receptors results in increases in the release of intracellular
calcium from the sacroplasma reticulum via activation of protein
kinase C. The binding of angiotensin-II in the vasculature results
in an increase in systematic vasculature resistance and restoration of
blood pressure.
Prolonged compensatory actions of the RAAS in HF bring
adverse consequences, however, including increased vascular
resistance. Increases in resistance create undue myocardial burden
and decreased cardiac output, resulting in left ventricular hypertrophy. Angiotensin-II initiates apoptosis and interstitial fibrosis,
which contribute to the remodeling of the extracellular matrix in
the myocardium (e.g., myocyte hypertrophy). The effects of

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

169

angiotensin-II on the myocardium and peripheral vasculature
results in decreased cardiac output and renal perfusion.
Angiotensin-II is also involved in the increase of plasma volume
by initiating production of minerocorticoid aldosterone by the
adrenal cortex. Aldosterone acts on the distal tubules of the renal
nephron and activates a sodium-potassium exchange, which
results in the retention of sodium and water. The increased plasma
volume exacerbates fluid overload and peripheral edema. Chronic
excess of aldosterone leads to increased fibrosis in the atria, ventricles, kidneys, and perivasculature.
3.2. Sympathetic
Nervous System

Vascular baroreceptors respond to declines in cardiac output and
stroke volume by increasing sympathetic nerve activity and consequent release of the catecholamine norepinephrine. Sympathetic
activation improves cardiac output by increasing heart rate, myocardial contractility and stroke volume. Sympathetic activation also
increases systematic resistance and blood pressure in the peripheral
vasculature, and via catecholamines, increases renin release and
angiotenin-II production, further increasing vascular resistance
and afterload.
The direct effects of sympathetic activation on the myocardium itself is primarily mediated via two classes of b-adrenergic
receptors, namely the b-1 and b-2 receptors. In a normal heart,
b-1s comprise approximately 80% of the total b-adrenergic receptor pool (13); however, chronic sympathetic activation significantly
downregulates b-1 receptors leaving a greater proportional presence of b-2 receptors of approximately 40% (13). While b-2 receptors are less downregulated, they are susceptible to inactivation
from repetitive agonist stimulation, becoming less responsive to
adrenergic agonists. Although the release of norepinephrine
acutely increases myocardial contractility, chronic stimulation in
HF worsens cardiac function (direct cytotoxic effects), resulting in
progressive dysfunction of the LV, worsening pulmonary edema
and potentially death. Higher levels of circulating norepinphrine
have been associated with poorer survival, and greater functional
decline in HF.

3.3. Systemic
Inflammation

The “cytokine hypothesis” proposes that HF progression is an
inflammatory process and that elevated levels of proinflammatory
cytokines worsen LV dysfunction. There is a significant body of
evidence to suggest that elevated levels of cytokines are associated
with cardiac decline in HF. Particularly, the inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) and Interluekin-6 (IL-6)
are among the most widely studied cytokines in HF.
TNF-a is a polypeptide that activates endothelial cells, recruits
inflammatory cells, and enhances the production of other
proinflammatory cytokines. TNF-a is secreted from immune cells

170

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

during the early stages of HF; however, in the final stages, the cardiac
myocytes secrete TNF-a in high quantities. TNF-a appears to be
particularly important in the transition from compensated to acute
decompensated HF; the latter being a state of exacerbated HF
requiring hospitalization. TNF-a has been extensively studied in
animal models, and overexpression of TNF-a by the cardiac myocytes leads to inflammatory myocarditis and subsequent mycocyte
hypertyophy, LV dilatation, and progressive LV dysfunction. For
example, exogenous administration of TNF-a at concentrations
comparable to those observed in HF, produces significant declines
in myocardial contractility, worsening LV dysfunction and increasing pulmonary endema.
IL-6 is also elevated in HF, particularly in the end-stages of
the disease. Although IL-6 was initially thought to have only
proinflammatory effects like those of TNF-a, research in murine
models suggests that IL-6 also plays an immune modulatory
role in response to secretion of TNF-a. IL-6 has direct effects
on the myocardium, including decreasing contractility, activating matrix metalloproteinases, and contributing to LV remodeling. Like TNF-a, IL-6 is secreted from the myocardial cells
during the end-stages of HF, but not during mild or moderate
stages of the disease.

4. Depression
in Heart Failure
4.1. Epidemiology
of Depression in Heart
Failure Patients

Depression in HF has been extensively studied because of its high
prevalence in HF patients and its tendency to worsen medical
prognosis (1–4). HF patients experience disproportionately high
rates of depression compared to the general population, with a
point prevalence of 21.5% (14) compared to 6.6% in the general
population (15). Single depressive symptoms, however, can be
detected in 24–85% of HF patients (2). Depression has also been
associated with incident HF. In a community sample of 2,501
patients (mean follow-up 14 years), Williams and colleagues found
that depression was an independent predictor of developing HF in
women (HR = 1.96, 95% CI = 1.11, 3.46, p = 0.02), but not in men
(5). In a study of 4,538 older adult patients enrolled in the Systolic
Hypertension in the Elderly Program (SHEP), depressed patients
were 2.82 times (95% CI = 1.71, 4.67; p < 0.001) more likely to
develop HF over a 4.5-year-follow-up period (6). The association
between depression and HF did not significantly vary by sex.
Although not all studies have found gender effects, Williams et al.’s
findings follow trends seen in depressed, non-HF populations: the
National Comorbidity Survey, for example, reported a 1.7 greater
odds of women developing depression at some point in their lifetime compared to men (15).

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

171

4.2. Patient
Characteristics
and Depression

The prevalence of depression in HF appears to significantly differ
by health status, demographics, and social factors. In their metaanalysis of depression in HF, Rutledge et al. found that 11–25% of
outpatients and 35–70% of inpatients were depressed (14).
Rutledge and colleagues also found that depressive symptomatology increased with severity of HF diagnosis, ranging from 11% of
patients with NYHA functional class I to 42% of NYHA class IV
patients (14). Several studies have found higher depression in
younger, as well as female HF patients (16). Social factors may
contribute to incident depression in HF. In a study of 245 HF
patients without depression at baseline, living alone, alcohol abuse,
perception of medical care as being a substantial economic burden,
and poor health status were independent predictors of developing
depressive symptoms (17). The effects appear to be multiplicative
in nature: 15.5% of patients developed depression when only one
of the factors were present, 36.2% developed depression when two
factors were present, and 69.2% developed depression when three
or more were present.

4.3. Clinical Outcomes
in Heart Failure
Patients with
Depression

Of great clinical significance, studies find that depression has
adverse effects on the course and prognosis of HF. Increased psychological surveillance of HF patients over the past 15 years has
highlighted the pivotal role of depression in HF (18). Sherwood
et al. (19) reported that depressive symptomatology was associated
with a 1.56 (95% CI; 1.07, 2.29; p < 0.001) increased risk of death
or hospitalization during a median 3-year follow-up period. In a
sample of 374 patients hospitalized for HF, Jiang et al. (20) found
that HF patients with major depression had 2.23 greater odds
(95%CI 0.04, 4.77; p = 0.04) of mortality and 3.07 (95%CI 1.41,
6.66; p = 0.005) greater odds of readmission at 1 year compared to
HF patients with no depression. In a sample of 1,006 hospitalized
HF patients, Jiang et al. (21) found that patients whose Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI) scores were 5–9, 10–18, and ³19
were 21%, 53%, and 83%, respectively, more likely to die than
patients whose BDI score was £5 (p < 0.001). Vaccarino et al. (22)
also found that there was a graded associated between the number
of depressive symptoms and increased risk of death or decline of
daily living at 6 months. In this prospective study of 391 patients
with decompensated HF on admission to the hospital, patients
with ³11 depressive symptoms, compared with those with <6
depressive symptoms, had an 82% higher risk of either functional
decline or death. In a study of longitudinal outcomes (mean follow-up 39 months) in HF patients with comordid atrial fibrillation,
Frasure-Smith et al. (23) found that elevated depressive symptoms
significantly predicted cardiovascular mortality (HR: 1.57; 95% CI
1.20, 2.07; p < 0.001). The authors also commented that the
increased risk of death was similar to risks associated with not taking
standard medications to manage HF, such as anticoagulants and

172

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

aldosterone antagonists. Worsening depressive symptomatology
over time is also associated with increased risk of adverse outcomes.
A study of 147 HF outpatients found that a 1-point change in BDI
scores was associated 1.07 increased risk of death or cardiovascular
hospitalization (95% CI 1.02, 1.12, p = 0.007) (24). The results
from these studies indicate that depression is an independent predictor of worse clinical outcomes in HF patients (18).
4.4. Quality of Life in
Heart Failure Patients
with Depression

5. Psychoneuroimmunology:
Understanding
Pathophysiological
Links Between
Heart Failure and
Depression

In addition to its cardiotoxic effects, depressed HF patients suffer
reduced physical functioning and worse quality of life. Depressed
patients report poorer quality of life and greater functional impairment than non-depressed patients, even when compared with
patients of a higher (i.e., worse) NYHA functional class, which may
suggest that patient perceptions of physical functioning, rather than
the clinical status itself, predicts quality of life outcomes (25, 26). In
a small study (n = 58) of associations between disease severity, functional status, depression, and daily quality of life, greater depression
severity was positively associated with worse self-reported physical
and emotional quality of life in HF patients. A recent study by
Hallas et al. (27) conducted in 146 HF patients found that patients
with more negative beliefs about the consequences of HF, and less
perceived control were more anxious and depressed compared to
patients with more positive beliefs. Greater depression ratings also
predicted poorer quality of life. Patients with more negative beliefs
also had more maladaptive behaviors and less coping resources,
which may also have downstream affects on quality of life. In a
study of 155 HF patients, Gottlieb et al. (16) found that depressed
patients scored significantly worse than non-depressed patients on
all components of the quality of life questionnaires. In a more recent
study, Gottlieb et al. (28) demonstrated that depression is minimally related to objective assessments of HF severity, such as peak
O2 consumption, B-type natriuretic peptide levels or ejection fraction. However, depression significantly affects subjective measurements of HF severity, such as NYHA classification or 6-min walk
test (8). Undoubtedly, depression negatively affects quality of life,
but there is building evidence to also suggest that depression alters
patient perceptions of physical functioning and disease severity,
which may result in poorer ratings on subjective measures.

Given the adverse effects of depression on cardiac prognosis,
understanding the biological pathways that link HF and depression
may provide routes for pharmacological and behavioral interventions. The comorbid nature of HF and depression suggests that
they share a similar pathophysiology: inflammation.

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

173

After more than a decade of research on this topic, although
the mechanistic relationships between depression and inflammation
are not fully understood, much progress has been made. Depressed
patients without HF have significantly higher levels of IL-1b, IL-6,
TNF-a, and Interferon-gamma (IFN-g) (29). Potential sources of
inflammatory activation in HF include SNS activation and hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (30, 31).
5.1. Lessons Learned
on Inflammatory
and Other Immune
Responses in
Depression in HF

One of the main lines of investigation in our laboratory has been
the application of the cytokine model and other theoretical models
of broader immune activation in the context of depression in HF.
We have conducted several studies that lend support to the theory
that systematic inflammation, as well as broader dysregulation of
immune system, may underlie the relationship between depressive
symptoms and progression of HF. Our approach to the study of
these topics has been the use of both cross-sectional and prospective studies. For the former, we have assessed a broad range of
inflammatory and cell adhesion biomarkers in patients with established HF and with a range of depressive symptomatology. For the
latter, we are studying with ACC/AHA Stage B patients, individuals who are at risk for developing symptomatic HF but who at
present are not symptomatic. In these individuals, we are again
assessing a broad range of inflammatory and cell adhesion biomarkers, as well as depression, but repeatedly over the course of
several years. The intention is to temporally model inflammation as
it relates to the onset and offset of depression and to the onset and
progression from non-symptomatic to symptomatic HF. Here we
present some of our cross-sectional findings.

5.2. Assessing
Depressive Symptoms

In our studies we have primarily measured depression via the Beck
Depression Inventory (version–IA; BDI-IA), which a 21-item selfadministered assessment of extent to which patients experience
depressive symptoms (32). Scores of 0–9 indicate minimal or no
depression, 10–18 indicate mild–moderate depression, 19–29
moderate–severe depression, and 30–63 severe depression. The
reliability of this measure in our samples has been a > 0.90. Since
there has been some evidence to suggest cognitive/affective and
somatic aspects of depression differentially relate to clinical course
in HF (33), we are also examining these BDI sub-scales of depression in our studies: (1) the cognitive/affective subscale assesses
symptoms such as sadness and dissatisfaction (13 items, score range
0–39); and (2) the somatic subscale assesses features such as changes
in appetite and feelings of fatigue (7 items, score range 0–21).

5.3. Assessing
Cyokines and Cellular
Adhesion Molecules

Circulating TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b levels are determined in
plasma by commercial ELISA. For IL-6, the intraassay CV (%) is
2.2, the inter-assay CV (%) is 3.9, and the assay sensitivity <0.71 pg/
mL; for TNF-a, the intraassay CV (%) is 8.0, the inter-assay CV

174

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

Fig. 1. Changes in sP-selectin in response to acute exercise in HF patients with high (>10,
n = 15) and low (£10, n = 23) BDI scores.

(%) is 16.3, and the assay sensitivity <0.18 pg/mL; for IL-1b, the
intraassay CV (%) is 6.8, the inter-assay CV (%) is 8.3, and the assay
sensitivity <0.1 pg/mL.
Circulating C-reactive protein (CRP) levels are determined in
plasma using the High Sensitive CRP Reagent Set (DiaSorin;
Stillwater, MN) using the Roche Cobas Mira Plus analyzer (Roche,
Palo Alto, CA). Intra- and inter-assay coefficients of variation are
<5%. Precision and sensitivity performance values are excellent: intraassay CV (%) <1.0, inter-assay CV (%) = 1.6, sensitivity <0.05 mg/L.
Soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1, sCD54)
and sP-selectin (sCD62P) are determined by commercial ELISA.
The precision and sensitivity performance values are as follows:
sICAM-1 (intra-assay CV (%) = 4.6, inter-assay CV (%) = 6.6, sensitivity <0.35 ng/mL); sCD62P (intra-assay CV (%) = 5.1, inter-assay
CV (%) = 8.8, sensitivity <0.5 ng/mL).
Proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNF, IL-6, and CRP, have
been associated with cardiac dysfunction in both human and animal models. However, in 2009 Wirtz et al. (34) in our group provided the first study investigating whether depressive symptoms
were associated with exercise-induced increases in circulating levels
of adhesion molecules expressed on endothelial cells (sP-selectin
and soluble sICAM-1), leukocytes (sICAM-1), and platelets (sPselectin). Using data from 39 middle-aged male HF patients and
19 male control subjects, the authors found that higher depression
symptomatology moderated greater increases in sP-selectin levels
in response to an acute exercise challenge over time in HF patients
as compared with control subjects (F = 3.25, p = 0.05). Post hoc
testing revealed that in HF patients, higher depression scores (BDI)
were significantly associated with greater increases in sP-selectin
levels over time in response to the exercise (Fig. 1).

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

175

Also, in HF patients, higher BDI scores were associated with
higher sP-selectin levels at pre-exercise and post-exercise time
points (main effect of BDI: F = 4.86, p = 0.035). These effects were
not found for the control subjects. These findings suggest that levels of sP-selectin are higher before and after exercise and have
greater increases in response to exercise in male HF patients with
increasing depressive symptom severity. These findings could have
implications for acute coronary syndromes associated with exercise
and thereby may impact mortality.
While it is widely acknowledge that indictors of inflammation
are cross-sectionally associated with both depression and HF severity, our laboratory was among the first to explore whether different
types of inflammatory markers prospectively predict depressive
symptom in HF patients. Wirtz et al. (35) assessed the relationship
of proinflammatory cytokines and cellular adhesion molecules on
depressive symptoms at 12 months following initial study of 30 HF
patients. The authors found that sICAM-1—but not IL-6 or
CRP—was associated with depression scores 12 months later
(r = 0.38, p = 0.045). Hierarchical linear regression models revealed
that sICAM-1 significantly predicted depression scores at the
12-month follow-up, with sICAM-1 independently explaining
between 7% (b = 0.26, p = 0.040) and 10% (b = 0.35, p = 0.045) of
the total variance in depression scores. These findings suggest that
the adhesion molecule sICAM-1 is an independent, prospective
predictor of depressive symptoms in HF. The prospective nature of
these findings support the suggested role for inflammation in
increasing the severity of future depressive symptomatology.
5.4. Assessing
Chemotaxis and
Cellular Immunity

Until recently, immune cell migration, particularly chemotaxis, has
been largely ignored in respect to depression symptoms and HF.
Chemokines are essential for providing signaling to leukocytes for
extravasation from the blood and directing locomotion (36, 37).
When overexpressed, recruitment and migration factors are injurious to the cardiovascular system (38) and can generate angiogenesis and fibrous tissue deposition, which can lead to myocardial
dysfunction in HF (39, 40). Particularly, studying acute physiologic responses to controlled challenges serve as a window into the
complex physiologic processes involved in cardiac diseases (41).
One of the members of our group therefore developed an
in vitro chemotaxis assay to assess functional capacity of peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). PBMCs are separated from
whole blood using Ficoll-Hypaque, washed, and then re-suspended
in RPMI 1,640 with 20 mmol/L HEPES (serum-free media). In
a modified Boyden chamber, the patient’s PBMCs are then incubated with either the bacterial peptide f-met leu phe (fMLP), the
physiologic chemokine stromal cell derived factor-1 (SDF-1), or
the adrenergic agonist isoproterenol, or chemotaxis buffer.
Chemotaxis responsiveness of PBMCs to the bacterial peptide

176

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

fMLP is commonly used to measure nonspecific natural immune
activity. The chemokine SDF-1 binds to its specific receptor
CXCR4, and subsequently stimulates lymphocyte adhesion and
transendothelial migration, playing a role in adaptive cellular
immunity. Levels of SDF-1 and CXCR4 are elevated in patients
with HF and have been found to attenuate cardiac myocyte contractility (27). PBMCs are incubated with these agents for 2 h at
37 °C, then the top of the membrane is then gently rinsed with
phosphate-buffered saline and the non-migrated cells are removed.
The membrane is then removed from the plate and briefly submerged in phosphate-buffered saline. Once dry, the membrane is
read by a fluorescence plate reader (CytoFluor) at an excitation of
485 nm and emission of 530 nm.
Redwine et al. (42) studied the relationship between depressive
symptoms and PBMC chemotaxis both at rest and in response to a
moderate acute exercise challenge in 65 middle-aged HF patients
and 45 non-HF control subjects. Chemotaxis of PBMCs was examined in vitro to either fMLP or SDF-1 immediately before and after
the exercise. The author found that HF patients had reduced
chemotaxis to SDF-1 compared with non-CHF subjects (p < 05).
The authors also found that higher BDI scores were significantly
associated with reduced baseline chemotaxis to SDF-1 in both CHF
and non-CHF subjects (p = 0.025). In contrast, higher BDI scores
were associated with increased chemotaxis to fMLP and SDF-1 in
response to exercise in the HF patients (p = 0.027; Fig. 2).
The authors also found that cognitive depressive symptoms,
but not somatic depressive symptoms were inversely associated
with baseline chemotaxis to fMLP and SDF-1 in HF and controls.
When stratified by HF diagnosis, these associations persisted when
controlling for covariates. However, neither cognitive nor somatic
symptoms were associated with changes in chemotaxis from preto-post exercise task.
The results from the study suggested a shift in immune cell
mobility in HF patients with greater depressive symptom severity,
with reduced chemotaxis to a physiologically specific chemokine at
rest but increased chemotaxis to both nonspecific and specific
chemical attractants in response to physical activity. Findings could
have implications for cardiac repair and remodeling in HF patients
and therefore disease progression.
A second chemotaxis study conducted by Redwine et al. (43)
investigated if depressive symptoms were related to alterations in
the sensitivity of PBMCs to the b-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol
in patients at rest and after acute exercise in 77 patients with HF
and 44 controls. As mentioned previously, sympathetically modulated immune dysregulation is a part of the pathophysiology of
HF; however, this process may be exacerbated in the presence of
depression. The study results indicated that depressive symptom
severity (p = 0.001) and higher resting levels of plasma norepinephrine

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

177

0.20
0.15
Chemotaxis

0.10

Stimulation

0.05

Index (log

0.00

transformed)

CHF- hi BDI
CHF- lo BDI
non CHF- hi BDI
non CHF- lo BDI

-0.05
-0.10
-0.15
Pre- exercise

Post- exercise

0.15
CHF- hi BDI
CHF- lo BDI
non CHF- hi BDI
non CHF- lo BDI

0.10
0.05
Chemotaxis
Stimulation

0.00

Index (log -0.05
transformed)
-0.10
-0.15
-0.20
-0.25
Pre- exercise

Post- exercise

Fig. 2. Changes in a logarithmic transformed stimulation index (SI) of chemotaxis to fMLP (top panel ) and the chemokine
SDF-1 (bottom panel ) in HF patients and non-HF controls with high (hi) and low (lo) Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) scores
in response to exercise. Data are expressed as means ± SEM.

(p = 0.003) were associated with greater chemotaxis after exercise
in patients with HF (Fig. 3).
The authors concluded that patients with HF with higher
depressive symptoms and plasma norepinephrine exhibit increased
circulating immune cell chemotaxis to isoproterenol, suggesting
greater adrenergic sensitivity. Increased immune cell migration in
patients with HF who have elevated depressive symptoms could be
associated with cardiac remodeling and HF disease progression.
5.5. Assessing Th1/
Th2 Ratios

Although, as we have discussed, inflammatory cytokines have been
implicated as a possible mediator of psychological symptoms of
depression and HF, it has been unclear if systematic inflammation
represents a broader dysregulation of the immune system.

178

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills
0.20

non-HF lo BDI
non-HF hi BDI
HF lo BDI
HF hi BDI

0.15
0.10
Chemotaxis
Stimulation
Index (log

0.05
0.00

transformed)
−0.05
−0.10
−0.15

1 nM

10 nM

100 nM

Isoproteronol

Fig. 3. Change scores (pre- minus post-exercise) and chemotaxis to three concentrations
of isoproteronol (1 nM, 10 nM, and 100 nM/L) in HF patients and non-HF controls. High (hi)
vs. low (lo) depression are determined by scores ³10 and <10 on the BDI. Data expressed
as means ± SEM.

Particularly, cellular immunity is important for protection against
infection. Th1 cells promote cellular immunity by rapidly producing
a range of cytokines such as IFN-g that activate other Th1 cells to
fight infectious agents. Th1 cells also exert a negative regulatory
role on Th2 cells that produce cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-10.
Th2 cytokines, on the other hand, attenuate immune defenses if
they are locally over-expressed, by decreasing activities of major
effectors such as Th1 cells (44, 45). A Th2 shift may have a profound effect on the susceptibility of the organism to infection (46),
increase inflammation, and lead to dilated cardiomyopathy and HF
(47). Maintaining Th1/Th2 homeostasis is important for preserving health. Thus, examining Th1/Th2 ratios can provide information on the balance of cellular immune activation vs. negative
regulation of cellular immunity.
Redwine et al. (48) examined the relationship of depressive
symptoms with cellular immune activity measured by the Th1/
Th2 ratio and cardiac rehospitalization and/or death in 18 HF
patients (mean age = 62, NYHA classes II–IV). The authors found
that higher baseline depression scores were associated with a prospective increase in incidence of cardiac-related hospitalizations
and/or death (p = 0.037). Lesser IFN-g/IL-10 expressing CD4+ T
cell ratios were related to higher depressive symptom scores at
baseline (p = 0.005, Fig. 4) and a prospective increased incidence of
cardiac-related hospitalization or death over a 2-year period
(p = 0.05). The results suggest that a shift in the Th1/Th2 ratio
may play a role in the association between depressive symptoms

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

179

Fig. 4. Relationship between IFN-g/IL-10 ratios and Hamilton depression scores in HF
patients.

and morbidity and mortality in HF patients, suggesting broader
immune dysregulation.
5.6. Other Pathways
and Explanations

The cytokine and immune dsyregulation models are only two
potential explanations for the link between HF and depression.
The most widely discussed behavioral pathway is medication adherence (34). Cardiac patients, including those with HF, who have
co-morbid depression have three times higher risk of cardiac medication non-adherence compared to non-depressed patients (35).
The management of HF relies on a complex regimen of medications and self-care practices, and patients who do not adhere may
suffer worse cardiac prognosis (34).
Another potential explanation for the link between depression and HF may be inherent due to the diagnosis of depression,
and measure of its severity. The diagnostic criteria for major
depressive disorder as well as screening for depressive symptoms,
includes both cognitive and somatic symptoms. Thus, depressive
symptomatology, such as fatigue, loss of energy, problems concentrating, weight loss or gain, and sleep disturbance, may be the
result of underlying cardiac dysfunction (3). More recent studies
have recognized this overlap, and now it is favored to report
somatic and cognitive symptomatology separately as we have
done in our studies.

180

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

6. Conclusions
HF is a major and costly public health concern, and its prognosis is
grim—with high hospitalization and mortality rates. It is well documented that HF patients experience disproportionately high rates
of depression and that depressed HF patients have worse clinical
outcomes than their non-depressed counterparts. Thus, understanding mechanisms that link HF and depression has become a
major area of scientific interest. A psychoneuroimmunological
approach to examining these relationships is proving fruitful and
merits increasing attention. The work conducted thus far in our
laboratory group, as well as other groups, suggests that HF and
depression may be linked by increased neuroimmune activation.
References
1. Kent LK, Shapiro PA (2009) Depression and
related psychological factors in heart disease.
Harv Rev Psychiatry 17:377–388
2. Norra C, Skobel EC, Arndt M et al (2008)
High impact of depression in heart failure: early
diagnosis and treatment options. Int J Cardiol
125:220–231
3. Watson K, Summer KM (2009) Depression in
patients with heart failure: clinical implications
and management. Pharmacotherapy 29:
49–63
4. Shapiro P (2009) Treatment of depression in
patients with congestive heart failure. Heart
Fail Rev 14:7–12
5. Williams SA, Kasl SV, Heiat A et al (2002)
Depression and risk of heart failure among the
elderly: a prospective community-based study.
Psychosom Med 64:6–12
6. Abramson J, Berger A, Krumholz HM et al
(2001) Depression and risk of heart failure
among older persons with isolated systolic
hypertension.
Arch
Intern
Med
161:1725–1730
7. Bui AL, Horwich TB, Fonarow GC (2010)
Epidemiology and risk profile of heart failure.
Nat Rev Cardiol 8:30–41
8. Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM et al
(2010) Heart disease and stroke statistics—2011 update: a report from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 123:18–209
9. Levy D, Kenchaiah S, Larson MG et al (2002)
Long-term trends in the incidence of and survival with heart failure. N Engl J Med
347:1397–1402
10. DeFrances CJ et al (2008) 2006 National hospital discharge survey. Natl Health Stat Report
5:1–20

11. Lloyd-Jones D, Adams RJ, Brown TM et al
(2010) Heart disease and stroke statistics—2010 update: a report from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 121:e46–e215
12. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH et al (2009)
2009 Focused update incorporated into the
ACC/AHA 2005 guidelines for the diagnosis
and management of heart failure in adults: a
report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines Developed in
Collaboration with the International Society
for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Am Coll
Cardiol 53:e1–e90
13. Bristow MR (2000) ß-adrenergic receptor
blockade in chronic heart failure. Circulation
101:558–569
14. Rutledge T, Reis VA, Linke SE et al (2006)
Depression in heart failure: a meta-analytic
review of prevalence, intervention effects, and
associations with clinical outcomes. J Am Coll
Cardiol 48:1527–1537
15. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O et al (2003)
The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results from the National Comorbidity
Survey
Replication
(NCS-R).
JAMA
289:3095–3105
16. Gottlieb SS, Khatta M, Friedmann E et al
(2004) The influence of age, gender, and race
on the prevalence of depression in heart failure
patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 43:1542–1549
17. Havranek EP, Spertus JA, Masoudi FA et al
(2004) Predictors of the onset of depressive
symptoms in patients with heart failure. J Am
Coll Cardiol 44:2333–2338
18. Tousoulis D, Antonopoulos AS, Antoniades C
et al (2010) Role of depression in heart

9

Neuroimmune Mechanisms of Depression in Heart Failure

failure—choosing the right antidepressive
treatment. Int J Cardiol 140:12–18
19. Sherwood A, Blumenthal JA, Trivedi R et al
(2007) Relationship of depression to death or
hospitalization in patients with heart failure.
Arch Intern Med 167:367–373
20. Jiang W, Alexander J, Christopher E et al
(2001) Relationship of depression to increased
risk of mortality and rehospitalization in
patients with congestive heart failure. Arch
Intern Med 161:1849–1856
21. Jiang W, Kuchibhatla M, Clary GL et al (2007)
Relationship between depressive symptoms and
long-term mortality in patients with heart failure. Am Heart J 154:102–108
22. Vaccarino V, Kasl SV, Abramson J et al (2001)
Depressive symptoms and risk of functional
decline and death in patients with heart failure.
J Am Coll Cardiol 38:199–205
23. Frasure-Smith N, Lesperance F, Habra M et al
(2009) Elevated depression symptoms predict
long-term cardiovascular mortality in patients
with atrial fibrillation and heart failure.
Circulation 120:134–140
24. Sherwood A, Blumenthal JA, Hinderliter AL
et al (2011) Worsening depressive symptoms
are associated with adverse clinical outcomes in
patients with heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol
57:418–423
25. Sullivan M, Levy WC, Russo JE et al (2004)
Depression and health status in patients with
advanced heart failure: a prospective study in
tertiary care. J Card Fail 10:390–396
26. Jiang W, Kuchibhatla M, Cuffe MS et al (2004)
Prognostic value of anxiety and depression in
patients with chronic heart failure. Circulation
110:3452–3456
27. Hallas CN, Wray J, Andreou P et al (2011)
Depression and perceptions about heart failure
predict quality of life in patients with advanced
heart failure. Heart Lung 40:111–121
28. Gottlieb SS, Kop WJ, Ellis SJ et al (2009)
Relation of depression to severity of illness in
heart failure (from Heart Failure and a
Controlled Trial Investigating Outcomes of
Exercise Training (HF-ACTION)). J Am Coll
Cardiol 103:1285–1289
29. Maes M (2001) Psychological stress and the
inflammatory response system. Clin Sci 101:
193–194
30. Penninx BW, Kritchevsky SB, Yaffe K et al
(2003) Inflammatory markers and depressed
mood in older persons: results from the health,
aging and body composition study. Biol
Psychiatry 54:566–572
31. Bremmer MA, Beekman AT, Deeg DJ et al
(2008) Inflammatory markers in late-life

181

depression: results from a population-based
study. J Affect Disord 106:249–255
32. Beck A, Steer RA (1987) Manual for the revised
Beck Depression Inventory. Psychological
Corportation, San Antonio
33. Linke SE, Rutledge T, Johnson BD et al (2009)
Depressive symptom dimensions and cardiovascular prognosis among women with suspected myocardial ischemia: a report from the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood InstituteSponsored Women’s Ischemia Syndrome
Evaluation. Arch Gen Psychiatry 66:499–507
34. Wirtz PH, Hong S, Redwine LS et al (2009)
Depressive symptoms are associated with soluble P-selectin reactivity to acute exercise in
heart failure. Biol Psychiatry 65:801–807
35. Wirtz PH, Redwine LS, Mills PJ (2010)
Response regarding inflammation as a predictor of depression in heart failure. Brain Behav
Immun 24:174–175
36. Szabo MC, Butcher EC, McIntyre BW et al
(1997) RANTES stimulation of T lymphocyte
adhesion and activation: role for LFA-1 and
ICAM-3. Eur J Immunol 27:1061–1068
37. Chen J, Fujimoto C, Vistica BP et al (2006)
Active participation of antigen-nonspecific lymphoid cells in immune-mediated inflammation.
J Immunol 177:3362–3368
38. Adamopoulos S, Parissis J, Kroupis C et al
(2001) Physical training reduces peripheral
markers of inflammation in patients with chronic
heart failure. Eur Heart J 22:791–797
39. Pyo RT, Sui J, Dhume A et al (2006) CXCR4
modulates contractility in adult cardiac myocytes. J Mol Cell Cardiol 41:834–844
40. Frangogiannis NG, Dewald O, Xia Y et al
(2007) Critical role of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1/CC chemokine ligand 2 in the
pathogenesis of ischemic cardiomyopathy.
Circulation 115:584–592
41. Linden W, Gerin W, Davidson K (2003)
Cardiovascular reactivity: status quo and a
research agenda for the new millennium.
Psychosom Med 65:5–8
42. Redwine LS, Wirtz PH, Hong S et al (2009)
Potential shift from adaptive immune activity to
nonspecific inflammatory activation associated
with higher depression symptoms in chronic
heart failure patients. J Card Fail 15:607–615
43. Redwine LS, Wirtz PH, Hong S et al (2010)
Depression as a potential modulator of betaadrenergic-associated leukocyte mobilization
in heart failure patients. J Am Coll Cardiol 56:
1720–1727
44. Bot A, Smith KA, von Herrath M (2004)
Molecular and cellular control of T1/T2 immunity at the interface between antimicrobial

182

J.A. Jiménez and P.J. Mills

defense and immune pathology. DNA Cell Biol
23:341–350
45. Elenkov IJ (2004) Glucocorticoids and the Th1/
Th2 balance. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1024:138–146
46. Fairweather D, Frisancho-Kiss S, Yusung SA
et al (2004) Interferon-g protects against
chronic viral myocarditis by reducing mast cell
degranulation, fibrosis, and the profibrotic
cytokines transforming growth factor-b1,
Interleukin-1b, and Interleukin-4 in the Heart.
Am J Pathol 165:1883–1894

47. Afanasyeva M, Georgakopoulos D, Belardi DF
et al (2005) Impaired up-regulation of CD25
on CD4+ T cells in IFN-g knockout mice is
associated with progression of myocarditis to
heart failure. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:
180–185
48. Redwine LS, Mills PJ, Hong S et al (2007)
Cardiac-related hospitalization and/or death
associated with immune dysregulation and
symptoms of depression in heart failure patients.
Psychosom Med 69:23–29

Chapter 10
A Reinterpretation of the Pathogenesis and Cure of Cancer
According to the Psychoneuroimmunological Discoveries
Paolo Lissoni
Abstract
The recent discoveries in the oncological researches have demonstrated that the prognosis of the neoplastic
diseases depends on not only the biological characteristics of tumors, including oncogene expression and
growth factor receptor activity, but also on the immune status of cancer patients. This is because the
well-documented importance of the anticancer immunity in the initiation of the tumor that is mainly
modulated by lymphocytes. In addition, the knowledge on the interactions between the immune and
neuroendocrine systems has demonstrated that the immune responses are physiologically under a psychoneuroendocrine control. In particular, it has been confirmed that the activation of the brain opioid tone may
suppress the generation of an effective anticancer immunity, whereas it is stimulated by other neuroendocrine structure, namely the pineal gland, through the release of at least two indole hormones with anticancer
activity, melatonin and 5-methoxytryptamine, exerting both antiproliferative and immunostimulatory
effects. By investigating the immune and neuroendocrine functions in cancer patients, it has been observed
that cancer progression is associated with a progressive decline in the pineal function, which would constitute
the main cancer-related endocrine deficiency, and the occurrence of the irreversible immune alterations.
The most prognostically important factors would consist of a diminished endogenous production of anticancer cytokines, such as IL-2 and IL-12, as well as an abnormally enhanced secretion of cytokines provided
by suppressive effect on the anticancer immunity, namely IL-14, TGF-beta, and IL-6. The psychoneuroimmunotherapeutic approach in the treatment of cancer would simply consist of the corrections of the various
endocrine and immune cancer-related alterations in an attempt to re-establish the neuroimmune condition
of the health status.
Key words: Neuroimmunomodulation, Psychoneuroimmunology, Psychoncology

1. Introduction
The recent advances in the discoveries of the chemical bases
mediating the influence of the psychospiritual status on the immune
system, the so-called Psychoneuroendocrinoimmunology (PNEI),
allowed the possibility to reinvestigate the pathogenesis of the

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_10, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

183

184

P. Lissoni

human neoplasms as a systemic disease, characterized by a progressive
alteration of the physiological psychoneuroimmune interactions
responsible for the modulation of the immune responses, including
the anticancer immunity (1–3). Then, in contrast to the strategies
commonly followed in the treatment of cancer that aim at the
destruction of cancer cells independently of the immune status of
cancer patients, the proposal of PNEI in the treatment of human
neoplasms is consisting of the correction of the major immune and
neuroendocrine alterations occurring during the clinical course of
the neoplastic disease, in an attempt to restore the neuroimmune
status of health. Therefore, the PNEI strategy in the treatment of
cancer is simply consisting of an exogenous substitutive administration of those natural anticancer hormones, such as the pineal
indole hormones (4), neuroactive substances, and antitumor cytokines, namely IL-2 and IL-12 (5, 6), whose endogenous production
is abnormally and progressively reduced in the neoplastic disease,
in association with strategies capable to counteract the enhanced
production of hormones and cytokines provided by an immunosuppressive activity.

2. The Physiology
of the Anticancer
Immunity

Obviously, a correct elaboration of psychoneuroimmune strategies
to cure cancer by restoring the natural immune resistance against
tumor growth requires well-defined knowledge of the physiological
mechanisms involved in the anticancer immunity, as well as an adequate analysis of the immune status of the single cancer patient
before the proposal of an immunotherapeutic strategy. At present,
it is known that the human anticancer immunity is substantially an
IL-2-dependent phenomenon (7) and that lymphocytes are the
main immune cells responsible for tumor cell destruction through
a cytotoxic mechanism (8).
IL-2 is the main growth factor for T lymphocytes, which is
able to transform NK cells into lymphokine-activated killer cells
(LAK) that are capable of destroying fresh human cancer cells
independently of their antigenicity, whereas in basal conditions NK
cells are only able to destroy laboratory artificial cancer cell lines
(5). On the other hand, T cytotoxic lymphocytes (CD8+ cells)
mediate an antigen-dependent anticancer cytotoxicity after their
activation by IL-12 released from the dendritic cells (6), which play
also a fundamental role in the anticancer immunity by presenting
tumor antigens in association with class I and class II histocompatibility antigens, with a following activation of T cytotoxic lymphocytes (CD8+ cells) and T helper (CD4+ cells) lymphocytes,
respectively (9, 10).

10

A Reinterpretation of the Pathogenesis and Cure of Cancer…

185

In any case, despite the great complexity of the mechanisms
involved in generating an effective antitumor immune reaction,
the anticancer immunity is synthetically founded on the three main
subtypes of CD4+ lymphocytes, which include the CD4+CD25−
(5), the CD4+CD25+ (11), and the CD4+CD17+ T cells (12). The
CD4+CD25− cells are defined as T helper (TH) lymphocytes, with
two further cell subtypes, the TH1 and TH2 cells on the basis of
their cytokine production, IL-2 or IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13,
respectively. The TH1 cells are the main producer of IL-2. The
CD4+CD25+ T cells are the so-called T regulatory lymphocytes (T
reg) (11), which play an immunosuppressive activity by inhibiting
the production of the two main anticancer cytokines in humans,
IL-2 and IL-12, through either a direct cell contact, or a secretion
of suppressive cytokines, namely TGF-beta (13) and IL-10 (14).
Finally, the CD17+ cells, which are simply defined as CD17+ cells,
would play a stimulatory effect on the anticancer immunity by
counteracting the generation of T reg lymphocytes. Other immunosuppressive cytokines are consisting of IL-6, namely produced
by macrophages and responsible for the induction of the
inflammatory response (15), and IL-1, TNF-alpha, IL-8, and
IL-13. An antitumor immunostimulatory effect is also at least in
part exerted by IL-15 and IL-18, with activities respectively similar
to those of IL-2 and IL-12, as well as by IL-17, which suppresses
T reg generation, and IL-23, which stimulates CD17+ cell differentiation (12). IL-2 has also appeared to stimulate T reg cells (16),
but it is not correct to reduce the role of IL-2 to the simple action
of T reg cell growth factor, since IL-2-induced stimulation of T reg
cells has been proven to be evident only in the patients who did not
respond to IL-2 cancer immunotherapy (17).
It is known that host–tumor interaction mainly depends on
three biological events, consisting of the efficacy of the anticancer
immunity, the angiogenesis of tumor mass, and oncogene expression by cancer cells. In any case, from a physiopathological point of
view, it would not be correct to separate these events, since an
effective anticancer immune reaction has appeared to be also able
to control the genetic characteristics of cancer cells and the angiogenic processes (18), as well as on the other hand angiogenic factors, such as VEGF, that have been proven to be also capable of
inducing an immunosuppressive status by inhibiting the maturation of dendritic cells and their IL-12 production (19).
2.1. The Theoretical
Bases of PNEI
and the Psychoneuroendocrinoimmune
System

PNEI is the most recent medical science that studies the neuroendocrinoimmune biochemistry, which mediates the emotions and
the states of consciousness and their influence on the status of
health through a regulation of the immune responses (1–3). The
discoveries of PNEI would have not only a medical and scientific
significance, but also a philosophic relevance, since they offer an
answer to the problem of the relationship between biological body

186

P. Lissoni

and spirit, as considered as the self-consciousness, by proposing a
reciprocal influence of the neuroimmunobiochemistry on the
status of consciousness and of the psychospiritual status on
the neuroimmune interactions.
According to the recent advances in the areas of the neurosciences and PNEI itself, it is possible to identify in the complex brain
neuronal interactions a pyramidal functional structure, consisting
of three fundamental levels of neuron relationships, represented by
the neurotransmission, the neuromodulation, and the psychoneuromodulation, which are the expression of three different grades
of brain neuronal integration.
The neurotransmission is characterized by the existence of five
main neurotransmitters, represented by noradrenalin, serotonin,
dopamine, acetylcholine, and histamine. Acetylcholine is responsible
for the maintenance of the status of awake, the memory processes,
and the ethical behavior. Noradrenalin is involved in activating the
mechanisms of stress and anxiety. Serotonin plays a major role in
the control of mood. Dopamine is responsible for the perception
of pleasure and for the expansion of consciousness and the extrasensorial sensitivity, including the hallucinatory experience. Finally,
histamine exerts an inhibitory action on food intake and a stimulatory activity on the awake status. The neuromodulation is founded
on the existence of two fundamental neuronal regulatory systems,
consisting of gabaergic-type A and glutamate neurons, provided by
an inhibitory and an excitatory action on the neuronal functions,
respectively. The excessive glutamate-induced neuronal excitation
may allow a neuron death due to the activation of the apoptotic
mechanisms.
Finally, the third superior integrative system, which realizes the
psychoneuromodulation, is constituted by three fundamental brain
functional units, consisting of opioid system, cannabinergic system,
and nitric oxide (NO) system. The opioid system has three main
types of opioid receptors, -mu, -delta, and -kappa receptor, with
beta-endorphin, met-enkephalin, and dinorphin as endogenous
agonists, and it is involved in mediating the unconscious life,
including stress, depression, and anxiety conditions (20). On the
other hand, the cannabinergic system, which produces two main
cannabinoid agonists, N-arachidonylethanol-amide (anandamide)
and 2-arachidonylglycerol (2-AG), is responsible for the perception
of pleasure and the expansion of consciousness (21). Finally, the
NO system is mainly involved in regulating the interactions between
opioid and cannabinergic systems, which are linked to the two
fundamental psychic principles proposed by Freud (22), Eros and
Thanatos, which are the expression of the spiritual consciousness,
love and sexual pleasure and of the unconscious life and selfdestruction, respectively.

10

A Reinterpretation of the Pathogenesis and Cure of Cancer…

187

2.2. The Psychoneuroendocrine Regulation
of the Anticancer
Immunity

The PNEI results have demonstrated that the psychoneuroendocrine
functions related to the perception of sexual pleasure and spiritual
life play a direct anticancer activity due to either antiproliferative
action exerted by both pineal indoles and cannabinoid agents, or
stimulation of the antitumor immunity (4, 21).
Finally, by considering the relation between the two major
brain systems of the psychoneuromodulation and the endocrine
glands, the opioid system is more linked to the pituitary gland, as
demonstrated by its activation in stress conditions (20), whereas
the cannabinergic system, which is functionally linked to the pineal
(22), is activated in conditions of pleasure and spiritual perception
(21). The two most investigated pineal indole hormones, melatonin (MLT) and 5-methoxytryptamine (5-MTT), have appeared
to exert an anticancer antiproliferative activity (4, 23). MLT and
5-MTT are mainly secreted during the night and during the day,
respectively, with a following well-defined light/dark circadian
rhythm in their secretion.
In vivo, the immune responses, including the anticancer
immunity, depend not only on immune factors, but also on their
psychoneuroendocrine modulation, because the existence of a
physiological brain central regulation of the immune system (1–3),
which represents the biochemical basis of psychological and spiritual influences on the immune reactivity. The opioid system has
been proven to inhibit the anticancer immune response (20),
whereas the cannabinoid-pineal functional unit plays a stimulatory
role on the antitumor immunity (4, 21), mainly due to a direct
stimulatory action of MLT itself on IL-2 production from TH1
lymphocytes by acting on specific cell surface MLT receptors, as
well as on IL-12 secretion from dendritic cells. In contrast, the
activation of the opioid system allows an inhibition of the secretion
of both IL-2 and IL-12 (20), and this finding could explain the
stimulatory influence of stress, depression, and pain on tumor
onset and development.

2.3. The Psychoneuroimmune Pathogenesis
of Cancer as a
Systemic Disease

The application of PNEI knowledge to the interpretation of cancer
pathogenesis has allowed us to identify those immune and neuroendocrine alterations, which may explain the failure of cancer patients
to destroy their tumor. These cancer-related immunoendocrine
alterations are not a simple epiphenomenon, but on the contrary
they represent the cause responsible at least in part for cancer progression related to the immunosuppressive status of patients. Then,
cancer-related immunosuppression would mainly depend on an
altered psychoneuroendocrine regulation of the immune system,
rather than to be the expression of a primary damage of immune
cells themselves (1–3).
Unfortunately, the common oncologic management of cancer
patients does not include the evaluation of their immune and
neuroendocrine status within the clinical investigations carried out
before proposing a therapy of cancer.

188

P. Lissoni

It is a common opinion that cancer patients do not immunologically
react against their tumors, but on the contrary the recent advances
in the knowledge of the anticancer immunity have demonstrated
that cancer patients have an immune reaction in the presence of
tumor, which, however, is consisting of the induction of an immunosuppressive status rather than an effective anticancer immune
response, and this finding would be the consequence of the great
variety of immune and neuroendocrine alterations, which characterize the progression of the neoplastic disease (24–27).
Cancer-related immune dysfunctions may be classified into
two essential types, consisting of alterations of cytokine blood concentrations and anomalies in immune cell and lymphocyte subsets,
which may be summarized, as follows:
1. Cytokine alterations: the main disorders in cytokine blood
concentrations, provided by a potential negative prognostic
significance, are consisting of:
–

Low levels of IL-2.

–

Low levels of IL-12 in the very disseminated disease.

–

High levels of TGF-beta and IL-10.

–

High levels of inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6,
IL-1, and TNF-alpha.

2. Immune cell alterations:
–

Low number of CD4+ T helper cells.

–

Low number of dendritic cells.

–

Increased number of T reg cells.

–

Possible low number of CD17+ cells.

As far as cancer-related endocrine and psychoneuroendocrine alterations are concerned, the progressive decline in the nocturnal
production of the pineal hormone MLT would represent the most
common cancer-related endocrine deficiency, which could at least
in part explain cancer progression because of its anticancer activity.
Another frequent endocrine alteration occurring in the advanced
neoplastic disease is represented by the evidence of hypercortisolemia and of a lack of the physiological cortisol circadian rhythm,
which has been proven to negatively influence the prognosis of several tumor histotypes, including lung and breast carcinomas (28).
As far as the status of the psychoneuromodulation in cancer
patients is concerned, the neoplastic disease is generally characterized by an enhanced brain opioid tone associated with a diminished brain cannabinergic tone, which would be responsible for the
progressive decline in the capacity of feeling pleasure, the so-called
anaedonia, with the progression of cancer.
Obviously, cancer-related immune and neuroendocrine
alterations are linked in a reciprocal way. Then, cancer-related

10

A Reinterpretation of the Pathogenesis and Cure of Cancer…

189

hypercortisolemia could be due to the enhanced production of
IL-6, which is able to directly stimulate cortisol secretion from the
adrenal gland, and on the other hand, the progressive decline in IL-2
production could depend at least in part on the concomitant progressive decline in the pineal function, namely in MLT secretion.
The systemic nature of the neoplastic disease is confirmed by
the evidence of a profound damage involving the psychoneuroendocrinoimmune system in patients with advanced neoplastic
disease, as documented by the great variety of alterations of the
immune, endocrine, and neuroendocrine functions and their
relationships, which may occur during the clinical course of the
neoplastic disease (24–27).

3. The
Neuroimmunotherapy of Cancer

The neuroimmunotherapy (NIT) of cancer constitutes a new
potential approach in the biological treatments of cancer, whose
aim is the correction of cancer-related immune and neuroendocrine alterations, in an attempt to restore the immunoendocrine
status of health. In fact, because of the physiological existence of a
neuroendocrine regulation of the immune responses, a manipulation of the immune system would have to be constantly associated
with a concomitant modulatory action of the neuroendocrine system. In more detail, the PNEI approach in cancer therapy is consisting of three major objectives:
1. The substitute therapy of cancer-related endocrine deficiency
of the pineal gland through the administration of pharmacological doses of MLT during the night and of 5-MTT during
the day, at least 20 mg/day for MLT and 5 mg/day for
5-MTT.
2. The correction of the main immune alterations by the exogenous injection of the two main anticancer cytokines in humans,
IL-2 and IL-12, by using low-dose IL-2 ranging from 1.5 to 3
million IU/day through a subcutaneous injection, because of
its less toxicity with respect to the intravenous route of administration, for 5 days/week for 4 consecutive weeks or by an
alternating schedule consisting of 2 weeks of therapy followed
by 2-week rest period for at least 3 months (29–31).
3. The inhibition of cancer-related inflammatory response,
because of its negative influence on the anticancer immunity.
The application of NIT in the treatment of human neoplasms has
to be constantly preceded by an adequate analysis of the immune
and endocrine status of cancer patients, in an attempt to put into
evidence their main anomalies and to know what has to be corrected by the various therapeutic strategies.

190

P. Lissoni

The history of the clinical cancer therapies according to a PNEI
approach may be chronologically synthetized, as follows:
1. Neuroimmune therapy with MLT alone as a palliative treatment
in metastatic cancer patients, for whom no other standard
effective therapy was available: it is extremely rare to observe
objective tumor regressions with MLT alone, which, however,
may occur in a percentage generally less than 3 % and with a
percentage of 1-year survival of 30 % in untreatable cancer
patients with life expectancy less than 1 year, with promising
results particularly in non-small cell lung cancer, pancreatic
cancer, and melanoma (32). In addition, MLT has been proven
to be effective in the palliative therapy of the neoplastic
cachexia, asthenia, and thrombocytopenia, because of its
thrombopoietic properties.
2. NIT with MLT plus subcutaneous low-dose IL-2 in untreatable metastatic solid tumor patients with life expectancy less
than 1 year: this schedule is justified by the fact that MLT has
appeared to enhance the efficacy of IL-2 in most solid tumor
histotypes, namely in non-small cell lung cancer, hepatocarcinoma, melanoma, gastric cancer, and pancreatic cancer. This
biological regimen has been shown to induce objective tumor
regressions in a percent of about 20 % and with a percent of
survival at 1- and at 3-years of about 50 % and 9 %, respectively (30).
3. Chemoneuroendocrine therapy with the conventional chemotherapies plus pharmacological doses of MLT in cancer patients
with poor clinical status: the association with MLT may reduce
the toxicity of chemotherapy, by resulting as effective in the
prevention of cardiotoxicity, neurotoxicity, and thrombocytopenia, whereas no efficacy was seen in the prevention of anemia,
neutropoenia, vomiting, and alopecia (32). Moreover, MLT
has also appeared to enhance the efficacy of chemotherapy
itself, and this evidence is not surprising, since it has been demonstrated that the anti-oxidant agents, as well as MLT itself,
may enhance the cytotoxic potency of the chemotherapeutic
drugs (33).
4. NIT with MLT, subcutaneous low-dose IL-2 and the longacting mu-opioid receptor antagonist naltrexone (NTX) (34):
another neuromodulatory strategy could be represented by a
block of cancer-related enhanced brain opioid tone, because of
its immunosuppressive effect. The results, however, are very
preliminary, and in particular it has to be established the
optimal schedule of NTX administration, in terms of either
dosage and/or times of administration.
5. NIT with subcutaneous low-dose IL-2 plus MLT and plus
subcutaneous low-dose IL-12 injected before the onset of IL-2

10

A Reinterpretation of the Pathogenesis and Cure of Cancer…

191

administration to stimulate the TH1 cell differentiation: the
association between IL-2 and IL-12 has been proven to induce
the maximal lymphocytosis described up to now in the literature (35). Since the efficacy of immunotherapy depends on the
increase in lymphocyte number, the association between IL-2
and IL-12 could constitute the best future immunotherapeutic
combination in the treatment of advanced human neoplasms.

4. Conclusions
According to the recent oncological discoveries, it is physiopathologically incorrect to separate the investigation of the genetic and
growth factor receptor expression by cancer cells from the analysis
of the endocrine and immune status of cancer patients. This statement I justified by the fact that the immune system may not only
inhibit cancer cells but also control their characteristics, as well as
the angiogenic processes, and the biological degree of malignancy.
Therefore, the grade of malignancy of cancer cells would simply
represent a consequence of a cancer-related immunosuppressive
status. So, the correction of all the great number of alterations in
the endogenous production of cytokines occurring during the
clinical history of the neoplastic disease represent a fundamental
aim in cancer therapy. Unfortunately, the development of anticancer
therapeutic strategies with monoclonal antibodies has diminished
the interest for cancer immunotherapy with cytokines.
Then, the most effective cancer immunotherapeutic schedule
described in the literature up to now still remains that with IL-2
plus IL-12, already proposed more than 10 years ago. A further
improvement could be achieved by activating IL-17 in an attempt
to counteract T- regulatory lymphocytes to have the anticancer
immunity.
References
1. Rubinow DR (1990) Brain, behaviour and
immunity: an interactive system. J Natl Cancer
Inst Monogr 10:79–82
2. Jankovic BD (1994) Neuroimmunomodulation.
From phenomenology to molecular evidence.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 741:3–38
3. Lissoni P, Cangemi P, Pirato D et al (2001) A
review on cancer-psychospiritual status
interactions. Neuroendocrinol Lett 22:
175–180
4. Maestroni JGM (1993) The immunoneuroendocrine role of melatonin. J Pineal Res
14:1–10

5. Grimm EA, Mazumder A, Zhang HZ,
Rosenberg SA (1982) Lymphokine-activated
killer cell phenomenon. J Exp Med
155:1823–1841
6. Banks R, Patel PM, Selby PJ (1995)
Interleukin-12: a new clinical player in cytokine
therapy. Br J Cancer 71:655–659
7. Chouaib S, Fradelizi D (1982) The mechanism
of inhibition of human IL-2 production.
J Immunol 129:2463–2467
8. Atzpodien J, Kirchner H (1990) Cancer, cytokines and cytotoxic cells. Klin Wochenschr
68:1–11

192

P. Lissoni

9. Rosenberg SA (1992) The immunotherapy and
gene therapy of cancer. J Clin Oncol
10:180–199
10. Woijtowicz-Praga S (1997) Reversal of tumorinduced immunosuppression: a new approach
to cancer therapy. J Immunother 20:165–177
11. Zou W (2006) Regulatory T cells, tumour
immunity and immunotherapy. Nat Rev
Immunol 6:295–307
12. Battelli E, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK (2007)
TH-17 cells in the circle of immunity and autoimmunity. Nat Immunol 8:345–350
13. Kasid A, Bell GI, Director EP (1988) Effects of
transforming growth factor-beta on human
lymphokine-activated killer cell precursors:
autocrine inhibition of cellular proliferation
and differentiation to immune killer cells.
J Immunol 141:690–695
14. Moore KW, O’Garra A, de Waal-Malefyt R et al
(1993) Interleukin-10. Annu Rev Immunol
11:165–172
15. Kishimoto T (1989) The biology of interleukin-6. Blood 74:1–10
16. Kunutso KL, Disis ML, Salazar LG (2007)
CD4 regulatory T cells in human cancer pathogenesis. Cancer Immunol Immunother
556:2471–2485
17. Cesana GC, De Raffaele G, Cohen S et al
(2006) Characterization of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in patients treated with highdose interleukin-2 for metastatic melanoma or
renal cell carcinoma. J Clin Oncol 24:
1169–1177
18. Foon KA (1989) Biological response modifiers:
the new immunotherapy. Cancer Res
49:1621–1627
19. Gabrilovich SI, Chen HL, Girgis KR et al
(1996) Production of vascular endothelial
growth factor by human tumor inhibits the
functional maturation of dendritic cells. Nat
Med 2:1096–1103
20. Plotnikoff NP, Miller GC (1983) Enkephalins
as immunomodulators. Int J Immunopharmacol
5:437–442
21. Grotenhermen F (2004) Pharmacology of cannabinoids. Neuroendocrinol Lett 25:14–22
22. Regelson W, Pierpaoli W (1987) Melatonin: a
rediscovered antitumor hormone? Cancer
Invest 5:379–385

23. Sze SF, Ng TB, Liu WK (1993) Antiproliferative
effect of pineal indoles on cultured tumor cell
lines. J Pineal Res 14:27–33
24. Riesco A (1970) Five-year cancer cure: relation
to total amount of peripheral lymphocytes and
neutrophils. Cancer 25:135–140
25. Broder S, Muul L, Waidmann TA (1978)
Suppressor cells in neoplastic disease. J Natl
Cancer Inst 61:5–11
26. Sacerdote P, Panerai A (1999) Role of opioids
in the modulation of TH1/TH2 responses.
Neuroimmunomodulation 6:422–423
27. Schwartz RH (2005) Natural regulatory T cells
and self-tolerance. Nat Immunol 6:326–330
28. Mormont MC, Levi F (1997) Circadian system
alterations during cancer processes: a review.
Int J Cancer 70:241–247
29. Wittington R, Fauldsm D (1993) Interleukin-2.
Drugs 46:4466–4483
30. Lissoni P, Brivio F, Fumagalli L et al (2008)
Neuroimmunomodulation
in
medical
Oncology: application of psychoneuroimmunology with subcutaneous low- dose IL-2 and
the pineal hormone melatonin in patients with
untreatable metastatic solid tumors. Anticancer
Res 28:1377–1382
31. Recchia F, Saggio G, Nuzzo A et al (2006)
Multicentric phase 2 study of interleukin-2 and
13-cis retinoic acid as maintenance therapy in
advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
J Immunother 29:87–94
32. Lissoni P (2000) Is there a role for melatonin
in supportive care? Support Care Cancer 10:
110–116
33. Conti A, Maestroni GJM (1995) The clinical
neuroimmunotherapeutic role of melatonin in
Oncology. J Pineal Res 19:103–110
34. Lissoni P, Malugani F, Bordin V et al (2002) A
new neuroimmunotherapeutic strategy of subcutaneous low-dose interleukin-2 plus the
long-acting opioid antagonist naltrexone in
metastatic cancer patients progressing on interleukin-2 alone. Neuro Endocrinol Lett
23:255–258
35. Lissoni P, Pittalis S, Rovelli F et al (1995)
Interleukin-2, melatonin and interleukin-12 as
a possible neuroimmune combination in the
biotherapy of cancer. J Biol Regul Homeost
Agents 9:63–66

Chapter 11
Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition
and Neural Plasticity
Rachel A. Kohman
Abstract
Over the years it has become evident that the immune system can affect the function of the central nervous
system (CNS), including altering cognitive processes. The impact of immune activation on the CNS is
particularly important for aged individuals, as the brain’s resident immune cells, microglia, acquire a proinflammatory profile. The low-grade chronic neuroinflammation that develops with normal aging likely
contributes to the susceptibility to cognitive deficits and a host of age-related pathologies. Understanding
why microglia show increased inflammatory activity (i.e., neuroinflammation) and identifying effective
treatments to reduce microglia activation is expected to have beneficial effects on cognitive performance
and measures of neural plasticity. However, microglia also promote regeneration after injury. Therefore,
effective treatments must dampen inflammatory activity while preserving microglia’s neuroprotective function. Discovering factors that induce neuroinflammation and investigating potential preventative therapies
is expected to uncover the ways of maintaining normal microglia activity in the aged brain.
Key words: Aged, Neuroinflammation, Learning, Memory, Neurogenesis, Long-term potentiation,
Exercise, Nutrition, Microglia, Cytokine

1. Introduction
Increased emphasis is being placed on the immune system’s ability to
impact health and functioning of the brain. While transient immune
activation is generally beneficial, chronic and/or heightened immune
activity can disrupt cognitive processes and even be neurotoxic (1).
The impact of immune activation on the central nervous system
(CNS) is particularly important for aged individuals, as normal aging
is associated with development of low-grade chronic inflammation in
the CNS. A key player in the development of the age-related increase
in neuroinflammation is microglial cells, the brain’s resident macrophages. Microglia acquire a pro-inflammatory profile during the
aging process and mount a heightened inflammatory response to
Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_11, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

193

194

R.A. Kohman

immune activation. These changes in microglia activity are proposed
to contribute to age-related cognitive decline, the incidence of neurodegenerative diseases, as well as exaggerate the behavioral and cognitive deficits following infection. As the number of individuals
surviving into old age continues to increase, the need to identify the
mediating factors of the age-related changes in immune activity and
potential treatments to slow or prevent its onset is crucial for ensuring healthy aging and reducing health care costs.
The present chapter reviews age-related changes in microglia
activity with an emphasis on the neural alterations and functional
consequences of increased microglia activity associated with aging,
as these changes have been suggested to contribute to age-related
cognitive decline, frailty, disease progression, and alterations in
mood. Additionally, we discuss how changes in immune activity in
the brain may exacerbate the behavioral and cognitive effects of
immune activation. Lastly, we explore the utility of non-drug based
therapies (i.e., aerobic exercise and diet) to attenuate chronic
neuroinflammation. The potential benefits of developing efficacious
treatments for reducing neuroinflammation are vast. In the context
of aging, anti-inflammatory treatments are expected to improve an
individual’s quality of life by improving general health, reducing
the incidence of cognitive deficits, and decreasing the risk of
neurodegeneration.

2. Microglia
Phenotypes and
Functional Roles

Microglial cells are the primary mediators of the innate immune
response within the brain. They are estimated to make up approximately 10% of the total glial cell population in the mouse brain (2).
Though microglia are distributed throughout the brain, certain
regions such the hippocampal formation, striatum, and olfactory
telencephalon have the highest densities in adulthood (3, 4). For
example, in the mouse brain cortical areas showed densities around
9–13% while the dentate gyrus showed more than 15% of the total
area was occupied by microglia (2). Whether the differences in
microglia distribution are related to cell function is unknown, but
may suggest that brain regions with higher densities may be more
vulnerable to inflammatory events.
In a normal (i.e., uninjured) adult brain, microglial cells remain
in a “resting” state. Resting microglia display a ramified morphology,
consisting of many fine processes and a small cell body (5). In contrast to the name, resting microglia are not inactive, but rather the
cellular processes are constantly surveying the surrounding extracellular space for any indication of infection or injury (6). Though
we are far from understanding the complete role of microglial cells
in the healthy brain, extensive research has focused on microglia

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

195

that have undergone “activation.” Microglia are a plastic group of
cells that rapidly respond to changes in the environment by undergoing morphological changes and the release of cytoactive agents
(5). For the sake of brevity, we will discuss activated microglia in
two categories: classical activation and alternative activation.
Classically activated cells express a proinflammatory phenotype
whereas alternatively active cells participate in regenerative processes. Microglia activation should be conceived of as a range of
activation rather than a simple on/off process, as cells may display
some but not all characteristics associated with the classic or alternative phenotype. Under some condition cells may be able to
express features of both phenotypes (7). How readily microglia can
switch phenotypes has not been fully determined.
Classically activated microglia mediate the inflammatory
response in the brain. In response to an injury or infection microglia acquire a reactive inflammatory phenotype, proliferate, and
release inflammatory molecules. One of the initial features of the
microglia inflammatory response is increased proliferation to
ensure sufficient numbers of microglia to combat the threat.
Additionally, microglia undergo morphological changes, as the
processes are reacted and thicken and the cells become amoeboidlike in appearance (8, 9). Substantial changes in the expression of
membrane-bound proteins accompany this transformation, as
microglia upregulate expression of the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules I and MHC II. Many of the activationassociated molecules are expressed at low levels in the resting state
but are upregulated following activation such as MHC II, ionized
calcium binding adaptor (Iba1), cluster of differentiation 86
(CD86), CD11b, CD68, and CD45 (4). As a means of coordinating the immune response, microglia secrete a host of signaling
molecules including the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β
(IL-1β), IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) as well as chemokines, reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide, and prostaglandins (4, 10).
Once the threat has been eliminated, microglia return to the resting surveillance state and reduce in numbers via programmed cell
death (11, 12). While the inflammatory response mounted by
microglia has the potential to be neurotoxic, particularly if prolonged, transient activation of microglia is generally beneficial and
helps restore brain homeostasis by eliminating threats that could
damage the brain.
In the alternatively activated form, microglia participate in
wound healing, regenerative processes and can actively suppress
inflammatory processes (13). Often the expression of the alternative
phenotype is a compensatory response that follows the initial
inflammatory response following injury as an attempt to restore
homeostatic balance and facilitate repair (5, 13). The antiinflammatory cytokines interleukin-4 (IL-4) and interleukin-13 (IL-13)
are primary stimuli for inducing the alternative phenotype (7, 13–15).

196

R.A. Kohman

Much of what we know about the alternative phenotype is based on
work with macrophage cells, microglia’s peripherally located relatives, and many of the identifying markers/antigens of alternative
activation are common to both macrophages and microglia. For
instance, increased expression of arginase 1 (AG1), mannose receptor (MRC1), peroxisome proliferation activation receptor gamma
(PPAR-γ), Ym1 (Chitinase 3-like 3), and found in inflammatory
zone 1 (FIZZ1) are markers of alternative activation (7, 13, 14,
16–18). Further, alternative activation is associated with increased
expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-10 (IL10), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and growth factors
such as insulin-like growth factor (IGF), nerve growth factor (NGF),
and brain-derived neural growth factor (BDNF) (13, 17, 19, 20).
The collective release of these factors fosters repair and reconstructive processes through regulating activity of the immune system,
metabolic processes, and stimulating growth.
Recent work using animal disease models indicates alternatively
activated microglia are important for limiting neurodegeneration
(7, 21). For example, in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis (MS)
deficiencies in IL-4 levels, the stimulus for alternative activation
lead to faster onset of symptoms, increased numbers of infiltrating
lymphocytes and classically activated microglia (7). Additionally,
alternatively activated microglia may be protective in models of
Alzheimer’s disease (13, 21, 22). For example, Jimenez et al. (22)
reported that alternatively activated microglia congregate around
β-amyloid (Aβ) plaques in a transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s
disease and concluded that these cells may aid in removing Aβ
plaques. Reducing the Aβ load may help limit inflammation and
cell death, as Aβ can induce an inflammatory response from microglia (4). Given the protective role alternatively activated microglia
play, identifying ways of enhancing the expression of the alternative
microglia phenotype may be beneficial for slowing the progression
of multiple sclerosis and potentially other diseases.

3. Age-Associated
Changes
in Microglia
Phenotype

A large body of research has established that microglia from healthy
aged animals express features associated with the classic inflammatory
phenotype (10, 23–26). For instance, aged animals in the absence
of any obvious neural pathology show increased expression of
MHC II molecules; this increase has been observed in rodents,
monkeys, and humans (24, 26–29). Though increases in MHC II
molecules can occur in alternatively activated microglia, the additional evidence of increased basal expression of the proinflammatory
cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α confirms that aging enhances
the inflammatory phenotype (23, 24, 26, 30–32). Additionally,

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

197

microglia from aged animals show increased expression of ED1
macrophage antigen, CD4, and leukocyte common antigen (26,
33, 34). It is important to note that the magnitude of microglia
activation in aged animals is lower than microglia activation induced
by an immune challenge. However, the chronic nature of the agerelated activation likely contributes to the deleterious effects.
As noted, one feature of microglia activation is an increase in
cell proliferation. While the data are limited, there is evidence that
aging increases microglia proliferation. For example, Rozovsky et al.
(35) found that cultured microglial cells isolated from the cerebral
cortex of aged rats show increased proliferation relative to young
rats. Similarly in the retina, microglia proliferation was increased in
10-month-old mice compared to 4-month-old mice (36). In a model
of peripheral nerve injury, aged rats showed a similar increase in
microglia proliferation during the first 3 days following injury relative
to young rats. However, on the fourth day postinjury young rats
showed a reduction in microglia proliferation, whereas aged
rats showed higher rates of proliferation, indicating that aged
animals take longer to terminate the proliferation response once
initiated (37). In agreement, work from our laboratory found
increased microglia proliferation in the dentate gyrus of aged mice
compared to adult mice (38). Whether this age-related increase in
microglia proliferation results in an increase in the total number of
microglia in the brain or particular regions is a matter of debate.
One study reported that stereological analysis revealed no agerelated differences in the number of microglia in the hippocampus
of C57BL/6J male mice, as less than a 10% increase was found in
the aged compared to young mice (39). However, a separate study
conducted by the same group of researchers found approximately a
20% increase in the number of new microglia in the dentate gyrus
and CA1 region of the hippocampus in female C57BL/6JNNIA
mice (40). These data indicate that sex differences exist, but whether
strain differences also exist has not been investigated. Further work
is needed to clarify whether the total number of microglia increases
in the aged brain. Alternatively, age-related increases in proliferation
may be accompanied by increased microglial cell death; indicating
that the turn-over of microglia may increase in the aged while the
total number would remain relatively similar to younger subjects.
Regardless, the age-associated increase in microglia proliferation
provides additional evidence that microglia undergo a host of
changes in response to aging.
Lastly, aging is reported to induce morphological changes in
microglia. For example, microglia in aged animals show increased
volume of their cytoplasm as well as an increase in the density of
lectin staining (37). Research has demonstrated that microglia take
on the characteristics of activated microglia, namely, shorter processes and increased cytoplasm (37, 41). Microglia from aged animals also show increased number of vacuoles and inclusion bodies

198

R.A. Kohman

in the processes containing partially degraded material, indicating
that microglia may be engaged in phagocytosis (41–43). It is
important to note that morphological features alone is neither necessary nor sufficient to reveal activation status, as microglia can
release cytoactive agents in the absence of morphological changes
(44) though the observation in conjunction with other measures
of activation is convincing evidence that aging primes microglia
toward the classically activated phenotype.
3.1. Age-Related
Changes in Microglia
Regulation

Currently, the stimulus or events responsible for initiating microglia
priming during aging is unknown. One possibility is that the lifelong removal of cellular debris is the underlying cause of microglia
priming, as microglia may be activated by factors released by dying
cells in the brain (10). Alternatively, irregular protein assembly can
initiate microglia activation, a common feature of many neurodegenerative diseases (45). Microglia may be subject to senescence
like majority of cells in the body. Streit (46) has proposed the
microglia dysfunction hypothesis that suggests that one impact of
aging is an increase in microglia dystrophy, as microglia show an
increase in abnormal morphology such as twisted processes and
cytoplasmic irregularities. These abnormal microglia have been
observed in the brain of non-demented aged individuals, but the
numbers of dystrophic microglia increase substantially when ongoing neurodegeneration is taking place (46). The age-related sensitization may result from one or a combination of these events that
increase the release of inflammatory molecules or impair the ability
of microglia, possibly via microglial cell death, to effectively defend
the CNS. Ultimately creating an environment characterized by
inflammation.
The age-related increase in microglia activity may also relate to
deficiencies in regulatory mechanisms that normally inhibit microglia. Given the potential damaging effects of inflammation within
the brain, regulatory mechanisms exist to maintain microglia in the
“resting” state and inhibit activation. For instance neurons and
astrocytes release substances that actively inhibit microglia activation. The best characterized example is CD200, a member of the
immunoglobulin superfamily of membrane glycoproteins, which is
considered a neuroimmune regulatory molecule. CD200 is released
by neurons as well as astrocytes and subsequently binds to it cognate receptor CD200R that is expressed by microglia (47). Neurons
are able to help maintain microglia in their quiescent or resting
state through activation of the CD200R (47, 48). Mice deficient
for CD200 show increased microglia division, as measured by
co-labeling with the cellular proliferation marker Ki67 (49).
Additionally, microglia from these CD200 deficient mice display
characteristics associated with classic activation (48), indicating
that CD200 is an important molecule in controlling microglia
activation. Aged mice show reduced expression of CD200 (24),

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

199

indicating that neurons have less regulatory control over microglia
activation.
In addition to CD200, other neuroimmune regulators show
reduced expression with aging. For instance, the chemokine
CX3CL1 (also known as fractalkine and neurotactin) is present at
reduced levels in aged mice compared to adult mice (50). Similar
to CD200, fractalkine is released by neurons and its receptor is
expressed on microglia (51). Fractalkine represents another system
through which neurons can regulate immune activity within the
brain. However, the effectiveness of this pathway seems to decline
with age as aged animals show reduced expression of fractalkine
within the brain that correlates with increased microglia activation
(50, 52, 53). Administering fractalkine to aged mice has been
shown to reduce microglia activation, indicating that the reduction
in fractalkine levels is a key component of the age-induced changes
in microglia. Further, blocking the activity of fractalkine by administering a fractalkine receptor antibody increases expression of
MCH II and IL-1β in adult animals, confirming that reducing
fractalkine activity increases microglia activation. Additional work
has shown that in response to an immune challenge aged mice
produce reduced amounts of fractalkine compared to adult mice
(50). Immune activation reduces expression of the fractalkine
receptor on microglia, but in aged mice there is a prolonged
decrease in receptor expression (50). The prolonged decrease in
the fractalkine receptor coupled with the reduced levels of the fractalkine ligand creates a weak regulatory mechanism, leaving microglia to continue to express an inflammatory phenotype. Knockout
mice that lack the receptor for fractalkine show exaggerated cell
death following administration of the neurotoxin, MPTP (1-methyl4-pheny;-1,2,3,6-tetra-hydropyridine) as well as an enhanced
neuroinflammatory response from microglia. These findings potentially indicate that the heightened neuroinflammatory response
from microglia contributed to the increase in cell death. Taken
together, evidence indicates that the aging brain loses strength in
controlling microglia activation, leaving microglia primed toward
the inflammatory phenotype that in response to an immune insult
results in an exaggerated response.
Microglia show an age-related decrease in sensitivity to substances that regulate microglia activity. For instance, Rozovsky
et al. (35) reported that, in culture, microglia from aged rats
showed decreased responsiveness to the anti-inflammatory cytokine
TGF-β that normally inhibits microglia activation and proliferation. Aged animals have increased basal expression of TGF-β, which
may be an attempt to overcome resistance or functional deficiencies
in receptor signaling (23). Further, aged mice show reduced hippocampal expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-4 and
increased expression of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) that acts to activate
microglia and induce proliferation (54, 55). The imbalance in

200

R.A. Kohman

pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines that develops with age likely
contributes to the deregulated activity of microglia leading to over
activation of these cells in the aged brain. Decreases in the inhibitory control from neurons and changes in sensitivity to regulatory
factors likely culminate to impair the ability of microglia to maintain normal homeostasis in the aged brain, creating cells that have
defaulted or have been induced to express an inflammatory phenotype. We know that neuroinflammation has the potential to profoundly impact normal brain function. Identifying the agent(s)
that initiate the age-associated microglia priming and discovering
ways to strengthen the compromised regulatory mechanisms will
represent a large step forward in the field and will aid in identifying
targets for novel pharmaceutical treatments.

4. Behavioral and
Cognitive Deficits
Following Immune
Activation

The communication between the brain and the peripheral immune
system allows the body to orchestrate a physiological and behavioral
response that facilitates recovery from infection. The behavioral
alterations are collectively termed sickness behaviors and include
development of a fever and reductions in locomotor activity, social
interactions, sexual behavior, and food intake (56–59). The expression of sickness behavior is an adaptive response that reflects a shift
in an animal’s motivation that aids in recovery from illness, as
reducing activity levels help conserve energy.
In addition to inducing sickness behavior, activation of the
immune system impairs learning and memory processes (60–64).
A host of work has demonstrated that administration of the bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or administration of a live
bacterium (e.g., E. coli) in adults disrupts acquisition and/or consolidation of new information. Reichenberg et al. (65) report that
administration of LPS to human participants disrupts memory, as
participants treated with LPS showed an impaired ability to learn a
15 item list of words, remember information from a story, and
recall features of the figure compared to control participants.
A more recent study reported that administration of LPS has no
effect on human memory performance (66). However, this study
administered half of the dose of LPS used in the Reichenberg study,
indicating that the effects may be dose dependent.
Studies conducted with non-human animals reveal that tasks
that engage the hippocampus are particularly sensitive to disruption following an immune challenge. Two commonly used behavioral tasks are auditory and context fear conditioning and the
Morris water maze. In the fear conditioning paradigm, a novel
context or a tone is paired with a mildly aversive footshock. Animals
that have learned the task will display a fear response (i.e., freezing)

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

201

when presented with the tone or placed back into the shock-paired
context. The hippocampus is involved in learning the association
between the context and footshock, but plays no role in learning
the tone-shock association. Pugh et al. (63) report that LPS administration selectively impaired memory consolidation in a contextual
fear conditioning task, but had no effect on auditory fear conditioning an effect later replicated by Thomson et al. (64).
Additionally, several reports observed deficits in spatial learning in
the water maze following immune activation (62, 67, 68). The
water maze is a hippocampus-dependent task, in which animals
must learn to locate a submerged platform by using spatial cues
located around the testing room. Collectively the data suggest that
immune activation disrupts performance on tasks that engage the
hippocampus.
Caution must be taken when interpreting the cognitive effects
of immune activation, as the accompanying sickness behaviors may
influence performance in behavior tests independent of cognitive
ability. Though researchers must be mindful many papers have
convincingly demonstrated that cognitive deficits cannot be completely explained by sickness behavior. For instance, in adult animals sickness behavior persists for approximately 24 h after LPS
administration whereas cognitive deficits are observed well beyond
this time frame (60). Additionally, LPS administration was shown
to disrupt acquisition of an autoshaping task, in which rats learned
to press a lever for food. However, if the rats were allowed to
acquire the task prior to LPS administration LPS has no effects on
performance, indicating that sickness behavior cannot fully explain
the performance decrements (69).
The cognitive deficits associated with immune activation have
been attributed to increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines,
particularly IL-1β, within the brain that are primarily released by
microglia (70, 71). Inhibiting cytokine activity in the brain of adult
animals has been found to block some of the cognitive deficits that
result from an immune stimulus (63, 72). Additionally, similar
deficits are observed following direct administration of cytokines
(70). Interestingly, basal levels of cytokines are required for normal
cognitive function, as inhibiting basal IL-1β levels disrupt memory
formation (71, 73). These data indicate that there is an optimal
range of cytokine levels in the brain and if the levels drop below or
exceed the normal levels cognitive performance may be at risk.
4.1. Aging Exaggerates
the Behavioral
and Cognitive
Response to Immune
Activation

One consequence of the age-related priming of microglial cells is
alterations in the response to infection. As noted, activation of
microglia and the behavioral changes induced by the cytokines
they release are generally beneficial and facilitate recovery. However,
if the microglia response becomes abnormal (inhibited or exaggerated) the impact can be deleterious. Aging appears to be an instance
when microglia display heightened activation in response to an

202

R.A. Kohman

immune stimulus. For example, researchers have consistently
shown that aged animals show prolonged proinflammatory cytokine
production in the brain following LPS administration. In adults,
cytokine levels in the brain return to baseline levels within 24 h,
whereas aged animals continue to show increased cytokine levels
(30, 50, 74). Some report that in addition to the increase in duration of cytokine release, aged animals show exaggerated cytokine
production compared to younger animals a few hours after LPS
administration (75, 76). However, this initial enhancement is not
always observed, possibility due to a ceiling effect, or may only
occur in some areas of the brain (77, 78), indicating that regional
differences in cytokine production may develop with aging.
Collectively these data highlight that priming of microglia during
the aging process sets up the brain to initiate an exaggerated and
prolonged immune response in an environment that may be less
able to terminate the response.
Not surprisingly, the age-related change in the
neuroinflammatory response prolongs the expression of sicknessassociated behaviors that are mediated by proinflammatory cytokines following immune activation (30, 74, 78, 79). For example,
Godbout et al. (30) reported that mice aged 20–24 months showed
prolonged reductions in social exploration and locomotor activity
following LPS administration in comparison with young mice.
More recent work has shown that immune activation similarly
extends the duration of depression-like behavior in aged mice, as
only aged mice show increased immobility in the forced swim and
tail suspension test 72 h after LPS administration whereas young
mice have recovered (79). Evidence that these exaggerated behavioral deficits are mediated by cytokine activity comes from studies
that have found inhibiting IL-1β prevents the prolonged sickness
behavior in aged animals (74). Additionally, administration of
minocycline, a tetracycline-derived antibiotic that inhibits microglia activation, facilitates recovery from sickness behaviors in adult
mice and attenuates LPS-induced cytokine expression in the hippocampus of aged mice (76). Ultimately, the evidence indicates
that aging exacerbates the time course of sickness associated behaviors that normally show a transient expression and these behavioral
abnormalities seem to result from increased and prolonged activation of microglia in the brain.
In addition to extending the duration of sickness behaviors,
aging increases the sensitivity to cytokine-induced cognitive deficits.
In comparison with younger animals, immune activation induces
greater deficits in learning and memory processes in aged animals
(75, 77, 80, 81). Aged mice show greater impairments in
working memory following LPS administration in a matching-toplace test in a radial arm water maze compared to younger mice
(75). These deficits were seen in conjunction with increased expression
of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α and enhanced staining for microglia in

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

203

the hippocampus of aged mice. This increased sensitivity to
LPS-induced cognitive deficits may occur as early as middle-age, as
year-old animals display enhanced learning deficits compared to
adults, but only following repeated administration of LPS (82).
Several reports have shown that changes in immune activity within
the brain can occur as early as middle age (83, 84) and continue to
progress as the organism ages, these changes likely contribute to
the increased vulnerability to cognitive deficits. Overall the findings
indicate that age-related changes in microglia lead to a prolonged
neuroinflammatory response to immune signals from the periphery that increases susceptibility to cytokine-induced cognitive
deficits.
4.2. The Role
of Inflammation
in Age-Related
Cognitive Decline

Normal aging is often accompanied by a decline in cognitive function. These age-related deficits in cognitive performance are not a
global reduction in all aspects of cognitive function, but rather
selective processes seem to be vulnerable to aging. For instance
aging is associated with a decline in executive processes including
working memory deficits (85). Additionally, processing speed is
reduced in aged individuals as well as impairments in selective
attention. In contrast sustained attention (i.e., ability to maintain
attention), semantic memory (i.e., memory of facts), and procedural or implicit memory are typically unaffected by aging (85).
Generally, age-related deficits in performance are most commonly
observed in tasks that are difficult and/or require shifting from one
task to another (85). Individuals that show memory deficits that
exceed what is normally associated with aging are diagnosed with
mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Often these deficits progress to
more severe forms of dementia including Alzheimer’s disease.
One distinct possibility is that the age-associated development
of mild chronic inflammation within the brain contributes to cognitive decline, and possibly the progression to more severe deficits
such as MCI and dementia. As noted, activation of the immune
system, through the release of proinflammatory cytokines, is known
to disrupt cognitive performance (10, 60, 61, 63). A major source
of inflammatory molecules within the brain is microglial cells,
which as previously described acquire an inflammatory profile in
aged subjects. Currently, it is unknown whether increased
inflammation is a normal part of the aging process or whether these
elevations result from sub-clinical infections. Research conducted
with humans has shown that increased plasma levels of
proinflammatory cytokines, particularly IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α,
are associated with cognitive impairments (86–88). For example, a
prospective study by Yaffe et al. (87) compared the preservation of
cognitive function over a 2-year period in elderly (average age of
74) males with and without a diagnosis of metabolic syndrome, a
condition characterized by abdominal obesity, hypertension, hyperglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and low high-density lipoprotein.

204

R.A. Kohman

Participants were assessed for plasma levels of the inflammatory
molecules C-reactive protein (CRP) and IL-6. Cognitive function
was measured at multiple points in the study by the Teng Modified
Mini-Mental State Examination test. Findings revealed that
individuals with metabolic syndrome showed a greater decline in
cognitive performance 2 years after the baseline assessment.
However, this was only true in participants that also showed high
serum levels of CRP and IL-6. These findings highlight that expression of inflammatory molecules positively correlate with the progression of cognitive deficits. Additionally, research has shown that
individuals suffering from dementia show increased plasma levels
of TNF-α and IL-1β (88, 89). Associations between elevated levels
of peripheral IL-6 and cognitive impairments are more reliably
observed than other cytokines, potentially indicating a special role
for IL-6 in mediating age-related cognitive decline.
The relevance of peripheral cytokine measures to levels in the
brain is of particular importance for the work conducted with
humans, as inflammation must also exist in the brain to mediate
the cognitive alterations. Prior work has confirmed that cytokines
produced within the periphery can gain access to the brain via
active transport across the blood brain barrier (BBB), entering at
the circumventricular organs that lack the BBB, or inducing de novo
cytokine production within the brain, particularly from microglia
(90–92). Clearly, changes in peripheral cytokine levels can influence
inflammation within the brain, suggesting that increased cytokine
levels in the peripherally may elevate cytokines within the brain.
Post-mortem analysis of cytokine levels in the brains of Alzheimer’s
patients has shown a marked increase in levels of IL-β (93) and
IL-6 (94). Additionally, TNF-α levels are significantly elevated in
the cerebral spinal fluid of Alzheimer’s patients relative to controls
(95). Furthermore, a recent study found that 50% of elderly patients
with MCI had increased microglia activation compared to controls
(96). These findings in conjunction with the work that indicates a
long-term use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID)
offers protection against the development of Alzheimer’s disease
(97) support the hypothesis that inflammation mediated by microglia in the brain may contribute to age-related cognitive decline
and the development of dementia.
In agreement with the human literature, research on aged animals has shown age-related deficits in performing spatial learning,
working memory, and associative learning tasks (83, 84, 98).
Research has shown that aged animals show exaggerated cognitive
deficits following an immune challenge, but whether basal changes
in immune activity in the brain contributes to the cognitive deficits
in aged animals has not been established. However, treatments that
reduce markers of inflammation within the brain are often associated with improvements in cognitive function in aged animals.
Currently the most convincing study was conducted by Gemma

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

205

et al. (25) who demonstrated that chronic infusion of a capase-1
inhibitor into the lateral ventricles improved memory in a context
fear conditioning task. Capase-1 is an enzyme that cleaves the proform of IL-1β into the active mature form. Inhibition of capase-1
via an antagonist results in reduced levels of active IL-1β within the
brain. Gemma et al. (25) report that reducing levels of IL-1β that
were elevated in the hippocampus of aged rats via the caspase-1
inhibitor restored performance in a contextual, but not auditory
fear conditioning paradigm to levels similar to young rats. These
findings suggest that basal elevations in cytokine levels in aged animals may contribute to selective cognitive impairments, as reducing
IL-1β levels only improved memory for the hippocampus-dependent task. The hippocampal specificity offers further validity to
these results, as in adult animals activation of the immune system
produces deficits only in contextual and not auditory conditioning
(63, 64), indicating that inflammation in the aged brain may
contribute to selective cognitive deficits that involve the
hippocampus.

5. Effects
of Inflammation
on Neuroplasticity

5.1. Hippocampal
Neurogenesis

The current literature suggests that the age-related increase in
neuroinflammation may contribute to cognitive decline, but the
neuromechanisms are unknown. One possibility is that inflammation
could impact the capability for plasticity in the brain. Accompanying
age-related cognitive deficits are alterations in measures of neural
plasticity. For example, aged subjects show deficiencies in adulthood hippocampal neurogenesis and long-term potentiation (LTP)
(54, 55, 99). Elucidating the role of neuroinflammation in altering
measures of plasticity may further our understanding of how agerelated cognitive deficits develop. We briefly cover two forms of
neuroplasticity known to show age-related deficits, with an emphasis on the immune systems involvement in these processes (both
beneficial and detrimental roles).
Beyond early development only two regions of the brain, the olfactory bulb and the sub-granular zone (SVZ) of the hippocampus,
unarguably retain the capacity to generate new neurons throughout life. New hippocampal granule cells result from proliferation of
progenitor cells followed by differentiation into neurons and incorporation into hippocampal circuitry. Cells that are not incorporated usually die. A variety of environmental factors can affect the
probability that new cells survive and incorporate, one of which is
inflammation. These new neurons are suggested to play a role in
certain forms of hippocampus-dependent learning and memory
(100–104). For instance, many studies show that interventions

206

R.A. Kohman

(e.g., exercise or environment enrichment) that enhance cognitive
function also increase hippocampal neurogenesis (100, 105).
Furthermore, pharmacological, genetic, or irradiation-induced
reductions in hippocampal neurogenesis lead to deficits in hippocampus dependent learning tasks (101, 103, 104). Aged subjects show decreases in both the proliferation and survival of new
hippocampal cells, which may contribute to cognitive decline associated with aging (99).
We are just beginning to understand the complex involvement
of the immune system in both supporting and impairing hippocampal neurogenesis. Recent evidence indicates that microglia under
quiescent (i.e., resting) conditions support hippocampal neurogenesis. For example, cultured neuropoietic cells from the SVZ
will eventually lose their ability to proliferate in culture. However,
adding microglia or medium from a microglia culture can restore
proliferation of these cells, indicating that microglia release factors
that facilitate continued neurogenesis (106). Further work has
shown that microglia are involved in directing the migration of
new cells and can increase the number of cells that differentiate in
neurons (107). Microglia play an important role in clearing new
cells that do not get incorporated into the granular cell layer via
phagocytosis, thereby helping to maintain the microenvironment
(108). In an in vivo model, Ziv et al. (109) report that housing
animals under enriched environmental conditions enhances both
hippocampal neurogenesis as well as microglia proliferation.
Additionally, these new microglia were suggested to show the
alterative neuroprotective phenotype as they tended to express IGF
that is known to promote neurogenesis. Similar effects of microglia
were observed in adrenalectomized animals, as the reduction
in glucocorticoids significantly increased neurogenesis and activated microglia (110). Following adrenalectomy, microglia showed
increased expression of the neuroprotective phenotype and
increased expression of the anti-inflammatory cytokine TGF-β
(110) that has been found to increase hippocampal neurogenesis if
over expressed (111). Collectively, the data indicate that microglia
participate in the induction and differentiation of new cells produced in the hippocampus primarily by releasing anti-inflammatory
and neuroprotective factors.
In contrast to their supportive role, activation of microglia following an immune challenge is known to inhibit hippocampal neurogenesis via the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Classic
inflammatory microglia activation is negatively correlated with hippocampal neurogenesis. For example, Ekdahl et al. (112) report
that administration of the endotoxin LPS significantly reduced the
number of new neurons in the granular cell layer and that this
effect was mediated by microglia, as administration of the microglia inhibitor minocycline blocked the reduction in neurogenesis.
In agreement, irradiation or LPS-induced reductions in hippocampal

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

207

neurogenesis can be attenuated by administration of an NSAID
(113). Clearly, induction of an inflammatory response within the
brain, particularly if prolonged, can impair the ability of the hippocampus to produce new neurons that may have detrimental consequences for cognitive function.
Aged mice show reduced proliferation and survival of new
neurons compared to adult mice (99, 114). One mechanism that
might contribute to the age-associated deficits in hippocampal
neurogenesis could be increased inflammatory signaling in the
brain. The age-related reduction in hippocampal neurogenesis is
correlated with increased microglia activation and elevated levels of
the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1β in the brain (115). Moreover,
central administration of a capase-1 inhibitor, that prevents the caspase-1 enzyme from cleaving IL-β into its active form, increased
the production of new cells in the hippocampus in aged rats, but
not young rats (116). Additionally, inhibiting caspase-1 reduced
microglia activation and levels of IL-1β in the hippocampus, indicating that IL-1β likely produced by microglia contributes to the
reduction in neurogenesis in the normal aged brain. Additionally,
administration of the anti-inflammatory chemokine fractalkine
(i.e., CX3CL1 or neurotactin) that helps maintain microglia in a
resting state was found to increase hippocampal neurogenesis in
aged but not young animals (52). As noted, aged animals show
reduced levels of fractalkine, but restoring levels in aged animals
reduced microglia activation and subsequently increased neurogenesis. Taken together, the data support the contention that the
age-related priming of microglia toward their inflammatory phenotype, possibly through deficiencies in regulatory mechanisms,
contributes to the age-associated reduction in hippocampal neurogenesis that may relate to cognitive decline.
5.2. Long-Term
Potentiation

Bliss and Lomo (117) demonstrated that stimulating hippocampal
fibers with a brief high-frequency stimulus produced an enduring
increase in the synaptic strength between the pre- and post-synaptic neurons, a phenomenon termed LTP. After the induction of
LTP a fixed stimulus will produce a heightened post-synaptic
potential compared to the initial response to the same stimulus.
The development of LTP is a calcium-dependent process, thought
to be mediated by calcium influx through a sub-type of the glutamate receptor, N-methyl d-aspartate (NMDAR). Though an
NMDAR-independent form of LTP also exists in which calcium
influx occurs through voltage-dependent calcium channels
(VDCC). This experience-dependent synaptic modification has
been proposed to be a neurobiological correlate of memory formation, as inhibition of LTP impairs performance in a variety of cognitive behavioral tasks (118). Aging is associated with a reduction
in the capacity to sustain LTP and may underlie some of the cognitive deficits that develop with normal aging (54, 55, 119, 120).

208

R.A. Kohman

Induction of microglia activation and proinflammatory cytokines
consistently produce impairments in the development of LTP.
Chronic infusion of the endotoxin LPS into the fourth ventricle is
reported to disrupt both the NMDAR-dependent and NMDARindependent forms of LTP as well as impair spatial learning ability
in the water maze (121). Similarly, systemic bacterial infection with
E.coli has been reported to reduce LTP in adult rats compared to
controls (122). The impairments in LTP following immune activation are likely mediated by the release of proinflammatory cytokines from microglial cells, as elevated levels of IL-1β, TNF-α, and
IL-6 inhibit LTP (123, 124). The role of IL-1β is slightly more
complex as low levels of IL-1β appear to be necessary to induce
LTP, as knockout mice lacking the IL-1 receptor show a complete
absence of LTP in the dentate gyrus (73). Additionally, administration of an IL-1 receptor antagonist impairs the maintenance of
LTP (125). Taken together, the data indicate that cytokines, particularly IL-1β, participate in synaptic modifications important for
cognitive function, but that increases in proinflammatory cytokines following an immune challenge disrupt the induction and
maintenance of LTP.
Animal studies provide convincing evidence that the age-related
priming of microglia and the slight basal increases in cytokine levels
in the brain may contribute to deficits in LTP. For example, Maher
et al. (55) identified two distinct subgroups of aged rats, those that
showed deficits in LTP maintenance and another group of aged
rats that did not differ from young rats. Only the aged rats that
failed to sustain LTP showed increased levels of IL-1β, whereas the
aged rats with no LTP deficits did not show elevated IL-1β levels.
Further age-related deficits in LTP are associated with microglia
activation, as 15-month-old rats showed increased expression of
the microglia activation markers CD86, CD40, and intercellular
adhesion molecule (ICAM) (119). Pretreatment with the microglia inhibitor, minocycline, was reported to partially restore LTP
(119). A separate study suggests that age-related elevations in
IFN-γ may contribute to the deficits in LTP by activating microglia
and inducing their release of IL-1β. Reducing IFN-γ levels was
reported to decrease microglia activation, IL-1β levels, and restored
the ability of aged rats to sustain LTP (54).
Several studies indicate that decreased expression of the antiinflammatory cytokine IL-4 contributes to the age-related deficits
in LTP maintenance (55, 120). For instance, administration of
VPO15 (phospholipids microparticles-incorporating phosphatidylserine), a compound that increases IL-4 levels, blocked the deficits
in LTP in both aged and LPS-treated young animals. Additionally,
aged animals show reduced expression of IGF that has been shown
to attenuate the induction of microglia activation by IFN-γ (54).
Collectively, these data indicate that the imbalance between the proand anti-inflammatory responses in the brain that develops with
normal aging can have detrimental effects on synaptic function.

11

6. Non-drug Based
Interventions to
Regulate Microglia

6.1. Caloric Restriction
and Diet

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

209

As discussed throughout this chapter anti-inflammatory pharmacological treatments have been shown to offer protection against
inflammation-associated cognitive deficits and alterations in measures of synaptic plasticity (126). Additionally, chronic use of antiinflammatory NSAID is reported to offer protection against the
development of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s disease (126). As we further our understanding of the
complex role microglia play in maintaining normal brain function as
well as their influence on disrupting brain function, it is clear that
complete inhibition of microglia may not be an ideal therapy. While
the use of anti-inflammatory compounds will reduce inflammation,
whether such drugs also inhibit the regenerative processes associated with alternative microglia activation is unclear. The ideal is
identifying a way to reduce inflammation while maintaining or possibly enhancing the neuroprotective properties of microglia. Future
research will certainly identify novel targets for drug development
that may increase the efficiency of anti-inflammatory drugs in attenuating age-related changes in neuroinflammation.
Lifestyle interventions may be an effective alternative to drugbased therapies to attenuate age-related increases in neuroinflammation
as well as cognitive decline. We focus on two therapies, namely nutrition and aerobic exercise, which have shown promise in regulating
immune activity within the brain.
Reducing caloric intake is a powerful method to combat the aging
process. Caloric restriction has been shown to increase life-span as
well as slow aspects of the aging process including cognitive deficits
and neurodegeneration (127). Retrospective studies have shown
that Alzheimer’s patients tended to have a higher caloric intake
prior to the disease onset, potentially suggesting that reducing calorie intake may reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s disease (127, 128).
The beneficial effects of caloric restriction may, in part, result
from its anti-inflammatory properties. Caloric restriction decreases
the age-related increase in the expression of the microglia markers
MHC II, CD11b, complement receptor 3 (CR3), and CD68 in the
corpus callosum (129, 130), indicating that caloric restriction
attenuates the age-induced activation of microglia. In contrast, mice
fed a diet high in fat and cholesterol show increased expression of
CD45, a marker of microglia activation and elevated basal expression of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α compared to mice fed a standard diet (131). Furthermore, mice fed the
high fat and cholesterol diet showed impaired working memory in
a radial arm water maze, which correlates with enhanced microglia
activation and cytokine expression. Collectively, the data support
that consumption of a poor diet that is high in fat and/or cholesterol exacerbates neuroinflammation while maintaining a healthy

210

R.A. Kohman

diet may attenuate the age-associated increase in inflammatory
signaling in the brain.
An alternative to reducing caloric intake is to change what we
eat. Increasing consumption of key nutritional elements may represent an effective way of combating age-related changes in
neuroinflammation. Aging has been associated with reduced plasma
levels of vitamin C and E, both of which have antioxidant and antiinflammatory properties (132). For instance, vitamin E has been
shown to reduce microglia activation in culture. Microglia preincubated with vitamin E showed diminished production of IL-1α,
TNF-α, and nitric oxide following LPS exposure compared to cells
only incubated with LPS (132). Additionally, increasing consumption of flavonoids, polyphenolic compounds found in many fruits
and vegetables may attenuate age-related changes in inflammation.
For instance, chronic administration of the flavonoids apigenin or
quercetin was reported to have attenuated cognitive deficits in
avoidance learning in aged and LPS-treated animals (133). In culture, exposing microglia to the flavonoid, luteolin, prior to LPS
exposure reduced microglia release of IL-1β and neuronal cell
death, indicating that luteolin is neuroprotective (134). Moreover,
aged mice that consumed luteolin showed improved performance
in a spatial working memory task and reduced expression of IL-1β,
IL-6, and marker MHC II in the hippocampus, indicating the cognitive improvements were associated with a reduction in microglia
activation (134).
6.2. Aerobic Exercise

The beneficial effects of engaging in aerobic exercise are vast, as
exercise improves cognitive function, efficiency of the vascular system, measures of neural plasticity, and increases production of
growth factors that support brain health (99, 100, 103, 105).
Overall, increasing physical activity is associated with improved cardiovascular health and a reduction in the risk of developing several
age-related pathologies such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases, metabolic syndrome, and diabetes (135, 136). Additionally,
aged individuals that had a high level of aerobic fitness had a larger
hippocampal volume and improved spatial memory compared to
aged individuals with a low level of physical fitness (137).
Furthermore, engaging in exercise is reported to slow the progression of cognitive decline in Alzheimer’s patients and improve the
initiation of movement in Parkinson’s patients (136). The preventive and regenerative effects of exercise likely result from the broad
physiological changes induced by exercise, including increasing production of growth factors and improving cardiovascular function
(136). In addition, exercise-induced changes in immune function
are suggested to contribute to the beneficial effects of exercise.
A wealth of evidence indicates that increasing physical activity
enhances immune function and facilitates recovery from infection
(135). These effects are particularly evident in aged individuals, as

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

211

exercise has been reported to increase anti-inflammatory cytokines
and enhance macrophage phagocytic activity in aged subjects (138,
139). Exercise has well-known immunomodulatory effects within
the peripheral nervous system. However, the ability of exercise to
modulate immune activity within the CNS has not been thoroughly investigated. Prior work found that treadmill running
decreases hippocampal levels of IL-1β (140). A recent study
reported that 2 weeks of voluntary wheel running attenuated neuron cell death following administration of trimethyltin, a chemical
that induces cell death in the granule cell layer of the hippocampus
(141). The protective effects of exercise were proposed to be mediated by increased production of IL-6, as knockout mice deficient
in IL-6 failed to show the protective effects of exercise. Though
IL-6 is classically considered a pro-inflammatory cytokine, it also
has anti-inflammatory properties depending on the signaling pathway activated (142). Evidence that IL-6 mediates some of the antiinflammatory effects of exercise comes from work by Starkie et al.
(143) who reported that exercising for 3 h or an intravenous IL-6
infusion equally attenuated endotoxin-induced increases in TNF-α.
The exercise-induced changes in the immune system appear to
enhance the overall efficiency of the immune system in defending
against an infection, as well as offer some protection against neuronal damage induced by inflammation.
Increasing physical activity has direct effects on microglial cell
activity. For example, Ang et al. (144) report that 12 weeks of treadmill running decreased the number of microglia in the septum.
Additionally, wheel running decreased the number of new born
microglia in the amygdala compared to sedentary mice (145).
However, these effects may depend on the brain region assessed
and the duration of training, as others report that exercise increases
microglia proliferation in the cingulate and motor cortex (146).
In the transgenic NSE/htau23 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease treadmill running is reported to attenuate the age-dependent
increase in microglia activation as measured by staining intensity of
CD11b. Aged transgenic mice show increased number of CD11b
positive cells in the hippocampus, but exercise reduced the number
of CD11b positive cells. Converging evidence that exercise modulates microglial cell activity comes from studies evaluating agerelated changes in gene expression using microarray technology.
Overwhelmingly, studies report that genes related to inflammation
show increased expression in the aged brain compared to young
mice (30, 84, 147, 148). Wheel running attenuates expression of
many of the inflammatory-related genes that increase with age (147,
148). Additionally, work by Ziv et al. (109) indicated that exposure
to an enriched environment that contained a running wheel tended
to increase microglia expression of IGF, potentially indicating that
microglia shifted toward the alternative neuroprotective phenotype.
Collectively, the data indicate that aerobic exercise may be an effective way to attenuate neuroinflammation in the aged brain.

212

R.A. Kohman

7. Conclusions
and Perspectives
Normal aging in the absence of disease increases microglia activation,
as these cells appear to be primed toward the inflammatory phenotype. The age-related shift in microglia can lead to increased basal
cytokine levels in the brain as well as a heightened and prolonged
inflammatory response to injury or infection. Although the mechanisms that initiate these changes in microglia in the aged brain are
unknown, it appears that an imbalance in pro-inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory molecules contributes to maintaining microglia
in their primed state. Neurons appear to lose their ability to regulate microglia activation and levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines
are reduced in the aged brain. The age-related changes in microglia likely contribute to the increased vulnerability to age-related
cognitive decline and neurodegeneration, particularly following an
immune challenge. Future work is needed to identify effective
interventions to modulate microglia activity in the aged brain.
Optimal therapies would attenuate the overactive inflammatory
phenotype associated with aging, while maintaining the cells’ ability to initiate a normal inflammatory response in the face of an
infection or injury and express the neuroprotective phenotype to
support brain health.
References
1. Basu A, Lazovic J, Krady JK, Mauger DT,
Rothstein RP, Smith MB et al (2005)
Interleukin-1 and the interleukin-1 type 1
receptor are essential for the progressive neurodegeneration that ensues subsequent to a
mild hypoxic/ischemic injury. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 25:17–29
2. Lawson LJ, Perry VH, Dri P, Gordon S
(1990) Heterogeneity in the distribution and
morphology of microglia in the normal adult
mouse brain. Neuroscience 39:151–170
3. Benveniste EN (1997) Role of macrophages/
microglia in multiple sclerosis and experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. J Mol Med
(Berl) 75:165–173
4. Tambuyzer BR, Ponsaerts P, Nouwen EJ
(2009) Microglia: gatekeepers of central nervous system immunology. J Leukoc Biol 85:
352–370
5. Kettenmann H, Hanisch UK, Noda M,
Verkhratsky A (2011) Physiology of microglia. Physiol Rev 91:461–553
6. Nimmerjahn A, Kirchhoff F, Helmchen F
(2005) Resting microglial cells are highly
dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma
in vivo. Science 308:1314–1318

7. Ponomarev ED, Maresz K, Tan Y, Dittel BN
(2007) CNS-derived interleukin-4 is essential for the regulation of autoimmune
inflammation and induces a state of alternative activation in microglial cells. J Neurosci
27:10714–10721
8. Xiang Z, Chen M, Ping J, Dunn P, Lv J, Jiao
B et al (2006) Microglial morphology and its
transformation after challenge by extracellular
ATP in vitro. J Neurosci Res 83:91–101
9. Aloisi F (2001) Immune function of microglia. Glia 36:165–179
10. Dilger RN, Johnson RW (2008) Aging,
microglial cell priming, and the discordant
central inflammatory response to signals from
the peripheral immune system. J Leukoc Biol
84:932–939
11. Jones LL, Banati RB, Graeber MB, Bonfanti
L, Raivich G, Kreutzberg GW (1997)
Population control of microglia: does apoptosis play a role? J Neurocytol 26:755–770
12. Gehrmann J, Banati RB (1995) Microglial
turnover in the injured CNS: activated microglia undergo delayed DNA fragmentation following peripheral nerve injury. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol 54:680–688

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

13. Colton CA (2009) Heterogeneity of microglial
activation in the innate immune response in the
brain. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 4:399–418
14. Kitamura Y, Taniguchi T, Kimura H, Nomura
Y, Gebicke-Haerter PJ (2000) Interleukin-4inhibited mRNA expression in mixed rat glial
and in isolated microglial cultures.
J Neuroimmunol 106:95–104
15. Butovsky O, Talpalar AE, Ben-Yaakov K,
Schwartz M (2005) Activation of microglia
by aggregated beta-amyloid or lipopolysaccharide impairs MHC-II expression and renders them cytotoxic whereas IFN-gamma and
IL-4 render them protective. Mol Cell
Neurosci 29:381–393
16. Raes G, De Baetselier P, Noel W, Beschin A,
Brombacher F, Hassanzadeh Gh G (2002)
Differential expression of FIZZ1 and Ym1 in
alternatively versus classically activated macrophages. J Leukoc Biol 71:597–602
17. Odegaard JI, Ricardo-Gonzalez RR, Goforth
MH, Morel CR, Subramanian V, Mukundan
L et al (2007) Macrophage-specific
PPARgamma controls alternative activation
and improves insulin resistance. Nature
447:1116–1120
18. Chang NC, Hung SI, Hwa KY, Kato I, Chen
JE, Liu CH et al (2001) A macrophage protein, Ym1, transiently expressed during
inflammation is a novel mammalian lectin.
J Biol Chem 276:17497–17506
19. Brodie C, Goldreich N, Haiman T, Kazimirsky
G (1998) Functional IL-4 receptors on mouse
astrocytes: IL-4 inhibits astrocyte activation
and induces NGF secretion. J Neuroimmunol
81:20–30
20. Nakajima K, Tohyama Y, Kohsaka S, Kurihara
T (2002) Ceramide activates microglia to
enhance the production/secretion of brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) without
induction of deleterious factors in vitro.
J Neurochem 80:697–705
21. Butovsky O, Koronyo-Hamaoui M, Kunis G,
Ophir E, Landa G, Cohen H et al (2006)
Glatiramer acetate fights against Alzheimer’s
disease by inducing dendritic-like microglia
expressing insulin-like growth factor 1. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:11784–11789
22. Jimenez S, Baglietto-Vargas D, Caballero C,
Moreno-Gonzalez I, Torres M, Sanchez-Varo
R et al (2008) Inflammatory response in the
hippocampus of PS1M146L/APP751SL
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease: agedependent switch in the microglial phenotype
from alternative to classic. J Neurosci
28:11650–11661
23. Sierra A, Gottfried-Blackmore AC, McEwen BS,
Bulloch K (2007) Microglia derived from

213

aging mice exhibit an altered inflammatory
profile. Glia 55:412–424
24. Frank MG, Barrientos RM, Biedenkapp JC,
Rudy JW, Watkins LR, Maier SF (2006)
mRNA up-regulation of MHC II and pivotal
pro-inflammatory genes in normal brain
aging. Neurobiol Aging 27:717–722
25. Gemma C, Bickford PC (2007) Interleukin1beta and caspase-1: players in the regulation
of age-related cognitive dysfunction. Rev
Neurosci 18:137–148
26. Perry VH, Matyszak MK, Fearn S (1993)
Altered antigen expression of microglia in the
aged rodent CNS. Glia 7:60–67
27. Streit WJ, Sparks DL (1997) Activation of
microglia in the brains of humans with heart
disease and hypercholesterolemic rabbits.
J Mol Med 75:130–138
28. Sheffield LG, Berman NE (1998) Microglial
expression of MHC class II increases in normal aging of nonhuman primates. Neurobiol
Aging 19:47–55
29. Sloane JA, Hollander W, Moss MB, Rosene
DL, Abraham CR (1999) Increased microglial activation and protein nitration in white
matter of the aging monkey. Neurobiol Aging
20:395–405
30. Godbout JP, Chen J, Abraham J, Richwine
AF, Berg BM, Kelley KW et al (2005)
Exaggerated neuroinflammation and sickness
behavior in aged mice following activation of
the peripheral innate immune system. FASEB
J 19:1329–1331
31. Ye SM, Johnson RW (1999) Increased interleukin-6 expression by microglia from brain
of aged mice. J Neuroimmunol 93:139–148
32. McLinden KA, Kranjac D, Deodati LE,
Kahn M, Chumley MJ, Boehm GW (2012)
Age exacerbates sickness behavior following
exposure to a viral mimetic. Physiol Behav
105(5):1219–1225
33. Kullberg S, Aldskogius H, Ulfhake B (2001)
Microglial activation, emergence of ED1expressing cells and clusterin upregulation in
the aging rat CNS, with special reference to
the spinal cord. Brain Res 899:169–186
34. Conde JR, Streit WJ (2006) Microglia in the
aging brain. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 65:
199–203
35. Rozovsky I, Finch CE, Morgan TE (1998)
Age-related activation of microglia and astrocytes: in vitro studies show persistent phenotypes of aging, increased proliferation, and
resistance to down-regulation. Neurobiol
Aging 19:97–103
36. Inman DM, Horner PJ (2007) Reactive nonproliferative gliosis predominates in a chronic
mouse model of glaucoma. Glia 55:942–953

214

R.A. Kohman

37. Conde JR, Streit WJ (2006) Effect of aging
on the microglial response to peripheral nerve
injury. Neurobiol Aging 27:1451–1461
38. Kohman RA, DeYoung EK, Bhattacharya TK,
Peterson LN, Rhodes JS (2012) Wheel
running attenuates microglia proliferation
and increases expression of a proneurogenic
phenotype in the hippocampus of aged mice.
Brain Behav Immun 26:803–810
39. Long JM, Kalehua AN, Muth NJ, Calhoun
ME, Jucker M, Hengemihle JM et al (1998)
Stereological analysis of astrocyte and microglia in aging mouse hippocampus. Neurobiol
Aging 19:497–503
40. Mouton PR, Long JM, Lei DL, Howard V,
Jucker M, Calhoun ME et al (2002) Age and
gender effects on microglia and astrocyte numbers in brains of mice. Brain Res 956:30–35
41. Vaughan DW, Peters A (1974) Neuroglial
cells in the cerebral cortex of rats from young
adulthood to old age: an electron microscope
study. J Neurocytol 3:405–429
42. Peters A, Sethares C (2002) The effects of age
on the cells in layer 1 of primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 12:27–36
43. Peters A, Josephson K, Vincent SL (1991)
Effects of aging on the neuroglial cells and
pericytes within area 17 of the rhesus monkey
cerebral cortex. Anat Rec 229:384–398
44. Cunningham C, Wilcockson DC, Campion S,
Lunnon K, Perry VH (2005) Central and systemic endotoxin challenges exacerbate the
local inflammatory response and increase neuronal death during chronic neurodegeneration. J Neurosci 25:9275–9284
45. Walker LC, LeVine H (2000) The cerebral
proteopathies: neurodegenerative disorders
of protein conformation and assembly. Mol
Neurobiol 21:83–95
46. Streit WJ, Xue QS (2009) Life and death
of microglia. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 4:
371–379
47. Broderick C, Hoek RM, Forrester JV,
Liversidge J, Sedgwick JD, Dick AD (2002)
Constitutive retinal CD200 expression regulates resident microglia and activation state of
inflammatory cells during experimental autoimmune uveoretinitis. Am J Pathol 161:
1669–1677
48. Hoek RM, Ruuls SR, Murphy CA, Wright
GJ, Goddard R, Zurawski SM et al (2000)
Down-regulation of the macrophage lineage
through interaction with OX2 (CD200).
Science 290:1768–1771
49. Deckert M, Sedgwick JD, Fischer E, Schluter
D (2006) Regulation of microglial cell
responses in murine Toxoplasma encephalitis

by CD200/CD200 receptor interaction. Acta
Neuropathol 111:548–558
50. Wynne AM, Henry CJ, Huang Y, Cleland A,
Godbout JP (2010) Protracted downregulation of CX3CR1 on microglia of aged mice
after lipopolysaccharide challenge. Brain
Behav Immun 24:1190–1201
51. Harrison JK, Jiang Y, Chen S, Xia Y,
Maciejewski D, McNamara RK et al (1998)
Role for neuronally derived fractalkine in
mediating interactions between neurons and
CX3CR1-expressing microglia. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 95:10896–10901
52. Bachstetter AD, Morganti JM, Jernberg J,
Schlunk A, Mitchell SH, Brewster KW et al
(2011) Fractalkine and CX(3)CR1 regulate
hippocampal neurogenesis in adult and aged
rats. Neurobiol Aging 32(11):2030–2044
53. Lyons A, Lynch AM, Downer EJ, Hanley R,
O’Sullivan JB, Smith A et al (2009)
Fractalkine-induced activation of the phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase pathway attentuates
microglial activation in vivo and in vitro.
J Neurochem 110:1547–1556
54. Maher FO, Clarke RM, Kelly A, Nally RE,
Lynch MA (2006) Interaction between interferon gamma and insulin-like growth factor-1
in hippocampus impacts on the ability of rats
to
sustain
long-term
potentiation.
J Neurochem 96:1560–1571
55. Maher FO, Nolan Y, Lynch MA (2005)
Downregulation of IL-4-induced signalling
in hippocampus contributes to deficits in LTP
in the aged rat. Neurobiol Aging 26:
717–728
56. Hart BL (1988) Biological basis of the behavior of sick animals. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
12:123–137
57. Kent S, Bret-Dibat JL, Kelley KW, Dantzer R
(1996) Mechanisms of sickness-induced
decreases in food-motivated behavior.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 20:171–175
58. Kent S, Bluthe RM, Dantzer R, Hardwick AJ,
Kelley KW, Rothwell NJ et al (1992) Different
receptor mechanisms mediate the pyrogenic
and behavioral effects of interleukin 1. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 89:9117–9120
59. Dantzer R (2001) Cytokine-induced sickness
behavior: mechanisms and implications. Ann
N Y Acad Sci 933:222–234
60. Sparkman NL, Kohman RA, Garcia AK,
Boehm GW (2005) Peripheral lipopolysaccharide administration impairs two-way active
avoidance conditioning in C57BL/6J mice.
Physiol Behav 85:278–288
61. Kohman RA, Tarr AJ, Sparkman NL, Day
CE, Paquet A, Akkaraju GR et al (2007)

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

Alleviation of the effects of endotoxin exposure on behavior and hippocampal IL-1beta
by a selective non-peptide antagonist of corticotropin-releasing factor receptors. Brain
Behav Immun 21:824–835
62. Sparkman NL, Kohman RA, Scott VJ,
Boehm GW (2005) Bacterial endotoxininduced behavioral alterations in two variations
of the Morris water maze. Physiol Behav 86:
244–251
63. Pugh CR, Kumagawa K, Fleshner M, Watkins
LR, Maier SF, Rudy JW (1998) Selective
effects of peripheral lipopolysaccharide administration on contextual and auditory-cue fear
conditioning. Brain Behav Immun 12:
212–229
64. Thomson LM, Sutherland RJ (2005) Systemic
administration of lipopolysaccharide and interleukin-1beta have different effects on memory
consolidation. Brain Res Bull 67:24–29
65. Reichenberg A, Yirmiya R, Schuld A, Kraus T,
Haack M, Morag A et al (2001) Cytokineassociated emotional and cognitive disturbances in humans. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58:
445–452
66. Grigoleit JS, Oberbeck JR, Lichte P, Kobbe P,
Wolf OT, Montag T et al (2010)
Lipopolysaccharide-induced
experimental
immune activation does not impair memory
functions in humans. Neurobiol Learn Mem
94:561–567
67. Shaw KN, Commins S, O’Mara SM (2001)
Lipopolysaccharide causes deficits in spatial
learning in the watermaze but not in BDNF
expression in the rat dentate gyrus. Behav
Brain Res 124:47–54
68. Arai K, Matsuki N, Ikegaya Y, Nishiyama N
(2001) Deterioration of spatial learning performances in lipopolysaccharide-treated mice.
Jpn J Pharmacol 87:195–201
69. Aubert A, Vega C, Dantzer R, Goodall G
(1995) Pyrogens specifically disrupt the acquisition of a task involving cognitive processing
in the rat. Brain Behav Immun 9:129–148
70. Barrientos RM, Higgins EA, Sprunger DB,
Watkins LR, Rudy JW, Maier SF (2002)
Memory for context is impaired by a post
context exposure injection of interleukin-1
beta into dorsal hippocampus. Behav Brain
Res 134:291–298
71. Goshen I, Kreisel T, Ounallah-Saad H,
Renbaum P, Zalzstein Y, Ben-Hur T et al
(2007) A dual role for interleukin-1 in hippocampal-dependent memory processes.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 32:1106–1115
72. Frank MG, Barrientos RM, Hein AM,
Biedenkapp JC, Watkins LR, Maier SF (2010)
IL-1RA blocks E. coli-induced suppression of

215

Arc and long-term memory in aged F344xBN
F1 rats. Brain Behav Immun 24:254–262
73. Avital A, Goshen I, Kamsler A, Segal M,
Iverfeldt K, Richter-Levin G et al (2003)
Impaired interleukin-1 signaling is associated
with deficits in hippocampal memory processes and neural plasticity. Hippocampus 13:
826–834
74. Abraham J, Johnson RW (2009) Central
inhibition of interleukin-1beta ameliorates
sickness behavior in aged mice. Brain Behav
Immun 23:396–401
75. Chen J, Buchanan JB, Sparkman NL,
Godbout JP, Freund GG, Johnson RW (2008)
Neuroinflammation and disruption in working memory in aged mice after acute stimulation of the peripheral innate immune system.
Brain Behav Immun 22:301–311
76. Henry CJ, Huang Y, Wynne A, Hanke M,
Himler J, Bailey MT et al (2008) Minocycline
attenuates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced
neuroinflammation, sickness behavior, and
anhedonia. J Neuroinflammation 5:15
77. Tarr AJ, McLinden KA, Kranjac D, Kohman
RA, Amaral W, Boehm GW (2011) The
effects of age on lipopolysaccharide-induced
cognitive deficits and interleukin-1beta
expression. Behav Brain Res 217:481–485
78. Huang Y, Henry CJ, Dantzer R, Johnson
RW, Godbout JP (2008) Exaggerated sickness behavior and brain proinflammatory
cytokine expression in aged mice in response
to intracerebroventricular lipopolysaccharide.
Neurobiol Aging 29:1744–1753
79. Godbout JP, Moreau M, Lestage J, Chen J,
Sparkman NL, O’Connor J et al (2008) Aging
exacerbates depressive-like behavior in mice
in response to activation of the peripheral
innate immune system. Neuropsychopharmacology 33:2341–2351
80. Abraham J, Johnson RW (2009) Consuming
a diet supplemented with resveratrol reduced
infection-related neuroinflammation and
deficits in working memory in aged mice.
Rejuvenation Res 12:445–453
81. Barrientos RM, Higgins EA, Biedenkapp JC,
Sprunger DB, Wright-Hardesty KJ, Watkins
LR et al (2006) Peripheral infection and aging
interact to impair hippocampal memory consolidation. Neurobiol Aging 27:723–732
82. Kohman RA, Tarr AJ, Byler SL, Boehm GW
(2007) Age increases vulnerability to bacterial
endotoxin-induced behavioral decrements.
Physiol Behav 91:561–565
83. Kohman RA, Crowell B, Kusnecov AW
(2010) Differential sensitivity to endotoxin
exposure in young and middle-age mice.
Brain Behav Immun 24:486–492

216

R.A. Kohman

84. Verbitsky M, Yonan AL, Malleret G, Kandel
ER, Gilliam TC, Pavlidis P (2004) Altered
hippocampal transcript profile accompanies
an age-related spatial memory deficit in mice.
Learn Mem 11:253–260
85. Drag LL, Bieliauskas LA (2010) Contemporary
review 2009: cognitive aging. J Geriatr
Psychiatry Neurol 23:75–93
86. Weaver, J.D., Huang, M.H., Albert, M.,
Harris, T., Rowe, J.W. and Seeman, T.E.
(2002) Interleukin-6 and risk of cognitive
decline: MacArthur studies of successful
aging. Neurology 59:371–8.
87. Yaffe K, Kanaya A, Lindquist K, Simonsick EM,
Harris T, Shorr RI et al (2004) The metabolic
syndrome, inflammation, and risk of cognitive
decline. JAMA 292:2237–2242
88. Alvarez XA, Franco A, Fernandez-Novoa L,
Cacabelos R (1996) Blood levels of histamine,
IL-1 beta, and TNF-alpha in patients with
mild to moderate Alzheimer disease. Mol
Chem Neuropathol 29:237–252
89. Licastro F, Pedrini S, Caputo L, Annoni G,
Davis LJ, Ferri C et al (2000) Increased
plasma levels of interleukin-1, interleukin-6
and alpha-1-antichymotrypsin in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease: peripheral inflammation
or signals from the brain? J Neuroimmunol
103:97–102
90. Banks WA, Farr SA, La Scola ME, Morley JE
(2001) Intravenous human interleukin-1alpha
impairs memory processing in mice: dependence on blood–brain barrier transport into
posterior division of the septum. J Pharmacol
Exp Ther 299:536–541
91. Watkins LR, Goehler LE, Relton JK,
Tartaglia N, Silbert L, Martin D et al (1995)
Blockade of interleukin-1 induced hyperthermia by subdiaphragmatic vagotomy:
evidence for vagal mediation of immunebrain communication. Neurosci Lett 183:
27–31
92. Dantzer R (2004) Cytokine-induced sickness
behaviour: a neuroimmune response to activation of innate immunity. Eur J Pharmacol
500:399–411
93. Griffin WS, Stanley LC, Ling C, White L,
MacLeod V, Perrot LJ et al (1989) Brain
interleukin 1 and S-100 immunoreactivity are
elevated in Down syndrome and Alzheimer
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 86:
7611–7615
94. Bauer J, Strauss S, Schreiter-Gasser U, Ganter
U, Schlegel P, Witt I et al (1991) Interleukin-6
and alpha-2-macroglobulin indicate an acutephase state in Alzheimer’s disease cortices.
FEBS Lett 285:111–114

95. Tarkowski E, Liljeroth AM, Minthon L,
Tarkowski A, Wallin A, Blennow K (2003)
Cerebral pattern of pro- and anti-inflammatory
cytokines in dementias. Brain Res Bull
61:255–260
96. Okello A, Edison P, Archer HA, Turkheimer
FE, Kennedy J, Bullock R et al (2009)
Microglial activation and amyloid deposition
in mild cognitive impairment: a PET study.
Neurology 72:56–62
97. Etminan M, Gill S, Samii A (2003) Effect of
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs on risk
of Alzheimer’s disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ
327:128
98. Rosenzweig ES, Barnes CA (2003) Impact of
aging on hippocampal function: plasticity,
network dynamics, and cognition. Prog
Neurobiol 69:143–179
99. van Praag H, Shubert T, Zhao C, Gage FH
(2005) Exercise enhances learning and hippocampal neurogenesis in aged mice.
J Neurosci 25:8680–8685
100. van Praag H, Christie BR, Sejnowski TJ, Gage
FH (1999) Running enhances neurogenesis,
learning, and long-term potentiation in mice.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:13427–13431
101. Jessberger S, Clark RE, Broadbent NJ,
Clemenson GD Jr, Consiglio A, Lie DC et al
(2009) Dentate gyrus-specific knockdown of
adult neurogenesis impairs spatial and object
recognition memory in adult rats. Learn Mem
16:147–154
102. Dupret D, Revest JM, Koehl M, Ichas F, De
Giorgi F, Costet P et al (2008) Spatial relational memory requires hippocampal adult
neurogenesis. PLoS One 3:e1959
103. Clark PJ, Brzezinska WJ, Thomas MW,
Ryzhenko NA, Toshkov SA, Rhodes JS
(2008) Intact neurogenesis is required for
benefits of exercise on spatial memory but not
motor performance or contextual fear conditioning in C57BL/6J mice. Neuroscience
155:1048–1058
104. Shors TJ, Townsend DA, Zhao M,
Kozorovitskiy Y, Gould E (2002) Neurogenesis
may relate to some but not all types of hippocampal-dependent learning. Hippocampus
12:578–584
105. Clark PJ, Brzezinska WJ, Puchalski EK,
Krone DA, Rhodes JS (2009) Functional
analysis of neurovascular adaptations to exercise in the dentate gyrus of young adult mice
associated with cognitive gain. Hippocampus
19:937–950
106. Walton NM, Sutter BM, Laywell ED, Levkoff
LH, Kearns SM, Marshall GP 2nd et al (2006)

11

Aging Microglia: Relevance to Cognition and Neural Plasticity

Microglia instruct subventricular zone neurogenesis. Glia 54:815–825
107. Aarum J, Sandberg K, Haeberlein SL, Persson
MA (2003) Migration and differentiation of
neural precursor cells can be directed by
microglia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100:
15983–15988
108. Sierra A, Encinas JM, Deudero JJ, Chancey
JH, Enikolopov G, Overstreet-Wadiche LS
et al (2010) Microglia shape adult hippocampal neurogenesis through apoptosis-coupled
phagocytosis. Cell Stem Cell 7:483–495
109. Ziv Y, Ron N, Butovsky O, Landa G, Sudai E,
Greenberg N et al (2006) Immune cells contribute to the maintenance of neurogenesis
and spatial learning abilities in adulthood. Nat
Neurosci 9:268–275
110. Battista D, Ferrari CC, Gage FH, Pitossi FJ
(2006) Neurogenic niche modulation by activated microglia: transforming growth factor
beta increases neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. Eur J Neurosci 23:83–93
111. Mathieu P, Piantanida AP, Pitossi F (2010)
Chronic expression of transforming growth
factor-beta enhances adult neurogenesis.
Neuroimmunomodulation 17:200–201
112. Ekdahl CT, Claasen JH, Bonde S, Kokaia Z,
Lindvall O (2003) Inflammation is detrimental for neurogenesis in adult brain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 100:13632–13637
113. Monje ML, Toda H, Palmer TD (2003)
Inflammatory blockade restores adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 302:1760–1765
114. Walter J, Keiner S, Witte OW, Redecker C
(2011) Age-related effects on hippocampal
precursor cell subpopulations and neurogenesis. Neurobiol Aging 32(10):1906–1914
115. Kuzumaki N, Ikegami D, Imai S, Narita M,
Tamura R, Yajima M et al (2010) Enhanced
IL-1beta production in response to the activation of hippocampal glial cells impairs neurogenesis in aged mice. Synapse 64:721–728
116. Gemma C, Bachstetter AD, Cole MJ, Fister
M, Hudson C, Bickford PC (2007) Blockade
of caspase-1 increases neurogenesis in the
aged hippocampus. Eur J Neurosci 26:
2795–2803
117. Bliss TV, Lomo T (1973) Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate
area of the anaesthetized rabbit following
stimulation of the perforant path. J Physiol
232:331–356
118. Martin SJ, Grimwood PD, Morris RG (2000)
Synaptic plasticity and memory: an evaluation
of the hypothesis. Annu Rev Neurosci
23:649–711

217

119. Griffin R, Nally R, Nolan Y, McCartney Y,
Linden J, Lynch MA (2006) The age-related
attenuation in long-term potentiation is associated with microglial activation. J Neurochem
99:1263–1272
120. Nolan Y, Maher FO, Martin DS, Clarke RM,
Brady MT, Bolton AE et al (2005) Role of
interleukin-4 in regulation of age-related
inflammatory changes in the hippocampus.
J Biol Chem 280:9354–9362
121. Min SS, Quan HY, Ma J, Han JS, Jeon BH,
Seol GH (2009) Chronic brain inflammation
impairs two forms of long-term potentiation
in the rat hippocampal CA1 area. Neurosci
Lett 456:20–24
122. Chapman TR, Barrientos RM, Ahrendsen JT,
Maier SF, Patterson SL (2010) Synaptic correlates of increased cognitive vulnerability
with aging: peripheral immune challenge and
aging interact to disrupt theta-burst latephase long-term potentiation in hippocampal
area CA1. J Neurosci 30:7598–7603
123. Cunningham AJ, Murray CA, O’Neill LA,
Lynch MA, O’Connor JJ (1996) Interleukin-1
beta (IL-1 beta) and tumour necrosis factor
(TNF) inhibit long-term potentiation in the
rat dentate gyrus in vitro. Neurosci Lett
203:17–20
124. Tancredi V, D’Antuono M, Cafe C,
Giovedi S, Bue MC, D’Arcangelo G et al
(2000) The inhibitory effects of interleukin-6
on synaptic plasticity in the rat hippocampus
are associated with an inhibition of mitogenactivated protein kinase ERK. J Neurochem
75:634–643
125. Schneider H, Pitossi F, Balschun D, Wagner
A, del Rey A, Besedovsky HO (1998) A neuromodulatory role of interleukin-1beta in the
hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:
7778–7783
126. Gorelick PB (2010) Role of inflammation in
cognitive impairment: results of observational
epidemiological studies and clinical trials. Ann
N Y Acad Sci 1207:155–162
127. Morgan TE, Wong AM, Finch CE (2007)
Anti-inflammatory mechanisms of dietary
restriction in slowing aging processes.
Interdiscip Top Gerontol 35:83–97
128. Luchsinger JA, Tang MX, Shea S, Mayeux R
(2002) Caloric intake and the risk of Alzheimer
disease. Arch Neurol 59:1258–1263
129. Morgan TE, Xie Z, Goldsmith S, Yoshida T,
Lanzrein AS, Stone D et al (1999) The mosaic
of brain glial hyperactivity during normal ageing and its attenuation by food restriction.
Neuroscience 89:687–699

218

R.A. Kohman

130. Wong AM, Patel NV, Patel NK, Wei M,
Morgan TE, de Beer MC et al (2005)
Macrosialin increases during normal brain
aging are attenuated by caloric restriction.
Neurosci Lett 390:76–80
131. Thirumangalakudi L, Prakasam A, Zhang R,
Bimonte-Nelson H, Sambamurti K, Kindy MS
et al (2008) High cholesterol-induced
neuroinflammation and amyloid precursor protein processing correlate with loss of working
memory in mice. J Neurochem 106:475–485
132. Li Y, Liu L, Barger SW, Mrak RE, Griffin WS
(2001) Vitamin E suppression of microglial
activation is neuroprotective. J Neurosci Res
66:163–170
133. Patil CS, Singh VP, Satyanarayan PS, Jain NK,
Singh A, Kulkarni SK (2003) Protective effect
of flavonoids against aging- and lipopolysaccharide-induced cognitive impairment in
mice. Pharmacology 69:59–67
134. Jang S, Dilger RN, Johnson RW (2010)
Luteolin inhibits microglia and alters hippocampal-dependent spatial working memory
in aged mice. J Nutr 140:1892–1898
135. Woods JA, Vieira VJ, Keylock KT (2009)
Exercise, inflammation, and innate immunity.
Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 29:381–393
136. Cotman CW, Berchtold NC, Christie LA
(2007) Exercise builds brain health: key roles
of growth factor cascades and inflammation.
Trends Neurosci 30:464–472
137. Erickson KI, Prakash RS, Voss MW, Chaddock
L, Hu L, Morris KS et al (2009) Aerobic
fitness is associated with hippocampal volume
in elderly humans. Hippocampus 19:
1030–1039
138. Jankord R, Jemiolo B (2004) Influence of
physical activity on serum IL-6 and IL-10 levels in healthy older men. Med Sci Sports Exerc
36:960–964
139. Ferrandez MD, De la Fuente M (1999)
Effects of age, sex and physical exercise on the
phagocytic process of murine peritoneal macrophages. Acta Physiol Scand 166:47–53
140. Chennaoui M, Drogou C, Gomez-Merino D
(2008) Effects of physical training on

IL-1beta, IL-6 and IL-1ra concentrations in
various brain areas of the rat. Eur Cytokine
Netw 19:8–14
141. Funk JA, Gohlke J, Kraft AD, McPherson
CA, Collins JB, Jean Harry G (2011)
Voluntary exercise protects hippocampal neurons from trimethyltin injury: Possible role of
interleukin-6 to modulate tumor necrosis
factor receptor-mediated neurotoxicity. Brain
Behav Immun 25(6):1063–1077
142. Scheller J, Chalaris A, Schmidt-Arras D,
Rose-John S (2011) The pro- and antiinflammatory properties of the cytokine
interleukin-6. Biochim Biophys Acta 1813:
878–888
143. Starkie R, Ostrowski SR, Jauffred S, Febbraio
M, Pedersen BK (2003) Exercise and IL-6
infusion inhibit endotoxin-induced TNFalpha production in humans. FASEB J 17:
884–886
144. Ang ET, Wong PT, Moochhala S, Ng YK
(2004) Cytokine changes in the horizontal
diagonal band of Broca in the septum after
running and stroke: a correlation to glial activation. Neuroscience 129:337–347
145. Ehninger D, Wang LP, Klempin F, Romer B,
Kettenmann H, Kempermann G (2011)
Enriched environment and physical activity
reduce microglia and influence the fate of
NG2 cells in the amygdala of adult mice. Cell
Tissue Res 345:69–86
146. Ehninger D, Kempermann G (2003) Regional
effects of wheel running and environmental
enrichment on cell genesis and microglia proliferation in the adult murine neocortex.
Cereb Cortex 13:845–851
147. Stranahan AM, Lee K, Becker KG, Zhang Y,
Maudsley S, Martin B et al (2010) Hippocampal
gene expression patterns underlying the
enhancement of memory by running in aged
mice. Neurobiol Aging 31:1937–1949
148. Kohman RA, Rodriguez-Zas SL, Southey BR,
Kelley KW, Dantzer R, Rhodes JS (2011)
Voluntary wheel running reverses age-induced
changes in hippocampal gene expression.
PLoS One 6(8):e22654

Chapter 12
Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior
Milo Careaga and Paul Ashwood
Abstract
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex and heterogeneous with a spectrum of diverse symptoms.
Mounting evidence from a number of disciplines suggests a link between immune function and ASD.
Although the causes of ASD have yet to be identified, genetic studies have uncovered a host of candidate
genes relating to immune regulation that are altered in ASD, while epidemiological studies have shown a
relationship with maternal immune disturbances during pregnancy and ASD. Moreover, decades of
research have identified numerous systemic and cellular immune abnormalities in individuals with ASD
and their families. These include changes in immune cell number, differences in cytokine and chemokine
production, and alterations of cellular function at rest and in response to immunological challenge. Many
of these changes in immune responses are associated with increasing impairment in behaviors that are core
features of ASD. Despite this evidence, much remains to be understood about the precise mechanism by
which the immune system alters neurodevelopment and to what extent it is involved in the pathogenesis
of ASD. With estimates of ASD as high as 1% of children, ASD is a major public health issue. Improvements
in our understanding of the interactions between the nervous and immune system during early neurodevelopment and how this interaction is different in ASD will have important therapeutic implications with
wide ranging benefits.
Key words: Adaptive immune system, Antibodies, Autism spectrum disorders, Autoantibodies,
Behavior, Brain, Chemokine, Cytokine, Innate immune system, Immunity

1. Introduction
Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are neurodevelopment disorders
characterized by impairments in verbal and nonverbal communication, social interactions, and the presence of restricted repetitive
behaviors, which are typically diagnosed by 3 years of age (1). In
the United States, the incident rate among children is estimated to
be 1 in 150 (2). Despite the large number of afflicted individuals,
the etiology of ASD is not well understood and all evidence pointing to a cause remains speculative, but likely involves a complex
interaction of genetic and environmental factors. Adding to the

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_12, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

219

220

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

confusion, symptoms and the disease course among patients with
ASD vary greatly, making both effective research and treatment
difficult. A rise in the number of cases in the last few decades has
additionally peaked concern; however, it remains to be determined
if the rise is merely a result of a broadening of diagnostic criteria
and increased awareness, or if other factors are at work (3). Despite
extensive research from a host of disciplines, ASD remains an
enigmatic disorder, but mounting evidence suggests a role for
immune involved in the etiology of ASD.
The etiology(ies) of ASD and the relative contribution from
genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors are currently
unknown. However, as early as 1971 Money et al. postulated that
there was an immunological contribution to the pathogenesis of
ASD and observed a familial link of ASD with polyendocrine
autoimmune disorder (4). Numerous small studies and case reports
followed throughout the 1970s and 1980s and the theory of
immune dysfunction in the pathology of ASD was developed;
however, the exact role altered immune responses have on neurodevelopment and ASD has remained controversial both in terms
of its existence as well as its role in the etiology of the disorder.
Since the late 1990s a number of epidemiology studies have
found that a familial link exists between ASD and immune dysfunction. The scope of these studies has varied greatly, with studies
ranging from small cohort studies to large population-based studies,
while the methods utilized range from self-reporting to examination of medical records or clinician evaluation. Furthermore, given
the limited rates of some immunological disease in the general
population, as well as varying rates between ethnic or geographical
background, direct comparisons among the various studies are
often difficult (5). However, despite these differences a number of
significant observations were repeatedly reported including the
association of risk for ASD with immunological conditions such as
maternal asthma and allergy (6), celiac disease (7, 8), type-1 diabetes
(6, 7, 9–11), autoimmune thyroid disease (12, 13), rheumatoid
arthritis (7, 8, 11, 14), and rheumatic fever (9, 14). Data from
these epidemiology studies show that the familial link for ASD is
not confined to maternal immune dysfunction and that paternal
immune conditions are also important (7, 9, 12–14). Arguably,
since fathers lack the interaction that occurs with the child during
fetal development and postnatally through breast milk, the paternal role that altered immune dysfunctions plays is likely a result of
heritable factors. Together these studies point to abnormal immune
function in first-degree relatives of families of children with ASD
and suggests that immune dysfunction is a risk factor for ASD.
Furthermore, the increased risk may stem from genetic changes or
altered physiological pathways that are shared between immune
conditions/diseases and ASD.

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

221

2. Gestational
Immune Activation
Pregnancy involves a unique and complex dynamic for the maternal
immune system: protection of the mother from pathogens/
infections, but also support and acceptance of fetal tissue that contains many “nonself” paternal antigens. During pregnancy the
uterus and placenta become tightly regulated immune environments, with uterine NK cells (uNK) together with macrophage
and dendritic cells establishing a maternal–fetal interface that promotes fetal health and development including early brain development (15). However, because of the complexity of regulating this
balance between immune tolerance and protection from pathogens, pregnancy represents a period of vulnerability to immune
insult not only for the mother, but for the developing fetus as well.
Both epidemiological and animal studies suggest that any disturbances in immune regulation during this vulnerable period can
result in altered neurodevelopment.
One such risk factor that can alter the gestational immune
profile and impact neurodevelopment is maternal infection. For
example, studies examining birth records of bacterial and viral outbreaks show that children born of exposed mothers have highly
increased rates for the neurodevelopmental disorder schizophrenia
(reviewed in ref. (16)). Similar case reports and small comparative
studies have also shown a casual link between maternal infection
and ASD (17–19). In a large population-based study using
Denmark’s medical registry, consisting of data from over a million
children during the period of 1980–2005, an increased rate of children with ASD was born from mothers who were hospitalized for
viral infections in the first trimester and bacterial infections in the
second trimester when compared with mothers with typically
developing children (20). Most maternal infections, however, do
not result in the development of ASD in offspring, suggesting
other factors such as a genetic susceptibility that control how the
mothers respond to infections are also involved. In individuals with
known genetic disorders that are associated with high rates of ASD,
such as tuberous sclerosis (TCS) which has a 25–50% rate of ASD
(21), associations are found between the incidence of ASD, season
of birth, and whether the peak flu season occurs during the later
stages of pregnancy (22).
Animal models support the role of gestational immune activation
on neurodevelopment (23). Using both viral and bacterial analogs
as instigators of maternal immune activation, altered neurodevelopment and behavioral changes in offspring can be observed
(24, 25). These experiments highlight that a generalized host
immune response to a pathogen rather than a pathogen-specific
response is involved. It is not fully understood how immune activation
affects early brain development, but it is believed that activation of

222

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

the maternal immune system leads to changes either in the placenta
or directly in the fetal brain which alter neurodevelopment
(26–28). A number of cytokines are induced during maternal
immune activation, of which IL-6 appears to be one of the major
mediators that can elicit neurodevelopmental changes in the various
maternal immune activation models. Using IL-6 knock-out mice
or blocking IL-6 with an antibody ameliorates the effect of maternal
immune activation (29). Similarly, inhibition of downstream
signaling pathways associated with IL-6 signaling such as JAK2/
STAT3 resulted in attenuation of social deficits in the offspring following maternal immune activation (30). In addition to IL-6,
other cytokines such as IL-2 can also alter neurodevelopment. IL-2
is a potent modulator of dopamine activity in the brain and can
increase motor activity when injected in mice; a finding that is
attenuated with a D-1 antagonist (31). Models where pregnant
dams are injected with IL-2 result in offspring that demonstrate
increased open-field activity, grooming, and rearing behavior (32).
Therefore, in these animal models the deficits in behaviors exhibited by the offspring of animals exposed during gestation to infections
or immune activation are likely the result of complex interactions
of a number of molecules produced both by the mother as well
as the offspring. Pinpointing the exact mechanisms and molecules
may help develop preventive strategies that could be useful in
cases of overt gestational immune activation.
Genetic factors may further contribute to the neuropathology in
offspring during maternal immune activation. Mice with disruptions
to genes associated with altered neurodevelopment, such as DISC1
or TSC1, appear to show a more exaggerated behavioral phenotype
with greater impairments in social interaction after maternal immune
activation (22, 33). The affects of maternal immune activation are
not limited to altered neurodevelopment in offspring and appear to
result in ongoing immune dysfunction in the offspring as well
(34–37). It is currently unclear whether the immune dysregulation
contributes to the behavioral endophenotype seen in offspring, but
increased dysregulation of immune cells, as well as altered cytokine
and chemokine profiles, has been linked to greater impairments of
behaviors in children with ASD (38–43).
2.1. Antifetal Brain
Antibodies

The transfer of antibodies from the mother to child during pregnancy is important physiologically and confers protection from a
wide range of infectious agents to the fetus. However, alongside
antibodies that provide immunoprotection, antibodies that are
immunoreactive to fetal proteins also cross the placental barrier
and can affect neonatal outcome (44). For example, the transfer to
the fetus of maternal anti-Ro/SS-A and anti-La/SS-B antibodies
in mothers with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) causes neonatal
lupus syndrome, often leading to congenital heart block (45–48).

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

223

Brain reactive autoantibodies are also transferred and in experimental
models can alter brain development, for example, neurotoxic
antibodies from patients with SLE when transferred into pregnant
mice result in abnormal brain development in the offspring (45).
In addition, abnormal thyroid function caused by placental transfer
of maternal antithyroid antibodies is often seen in infants born to
mothers with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis or Graves’ disease (49), and
some cases of neonatal antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) are
thought to occur due to the transfer of maternal autoantibodies
from mothers with primary APS (50). The presence of autoantibodies directed against neuronal components of fetal brain extracts
in some mothers of children with ASD children suggests a similar
mechanism may occur in ASD (51–53). In approximately 12% of
mothers with children with ASD, a strong pattern of antibody
reactivity to fetal but not adult brain proteins is observed (51). The
exact target of these antibodies is not known but they appear to be
specific for mothers of children with autism and have so far not
been observed in mothers of children who are typically developing
or mothers of children who have developmental disorders other
than ASD (51).
The ASD-specific nature of these antibodies is exciting and
warrants further study. One possibility is that these antibodies bind
to their neuronal targets during development, thereby interfering
with, or altering neurodevelopment. Although it is hard to recapitulate exactly the core features of ASD in animal models, certain
behaviors associated with ASD such as repetitive behaviors, difficulty
in learning, and hyperactivity can be replicated (54). In one model
the transference of IgG isolated from mothers with children with
ASD into Rhesus macaque monkeys during midgestation resulted
in increased stereotypical behavior and hyperactivity in the offspring
that were not observed in monkeys which received IgG from mothers of typically developing children or monkeys treated with saline
(55). Evidence of a potential role for these antibodies and altered
neurodevelopment was also observed in a murine model (56).
Whether these behavioral changes are directly related to ASD or
are themselves distinct phenomena is not clear; however, these
models suggest that antibodies isolated from some mothers with
children with ASD may alter the course of early neurodevelopment
leading to changes in behavior. Given the potential risk these antibodies may present (51), more work is needed to better characterize them both in terms of their cellular targets as well as the
behavioral changes they evoke. Despite being present in only a
fraction of mothers of children with ASD, these antibodies may
lend clues which could lead to a better understanding of the
pathology of ASD and may even represent a potential avenue for
screening or therapy.

224

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

3. Altered Cytokine
Production
Complex neuroimmune interactions occur early during development
and continue throughout life. Cytokines and their receptors are
produced and expressed by neurons and help to shape neuronal
differentiation, proliferation, migration, and synaptic plasticity
(57). This interaction occurs either directly or through endocrine
intermediates (58). The neuroimmune system works by maintaining an intricate balance, and dysregulation in one system often
results in dysregulation of the others (reviewed in ref. (59)).
Increased immune activation is associated with a number of
neurodegenerative disorders and is speculated to play a role in psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia (60), obsessive compulsive
disorder (61), depression (62), bipolar disorder (63), Gilles de La
Tourette syndrome (61), and ASD (64–66). Elevated levels of
inflammatory cytokines in the CNS could reflect inflammatory
processes that modulate neuronal function. Increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6, TNF-α, and MCP-1, in brain
specimens and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) obtained from young and
old individuals with ASD (age range 5–44 years), suggest ongoing
neuroinflammatory processes in ASD (67, 68). Studies that have
assessed cytokine levels in the periphery also show increases in proinflammatory cytokines (39, 69–72). Inflammatory processes are
kept in check by the release of cytokines that have anti-inflammatory
or regulatory properties such as IL-10 and TGFβ1. In ASD, production of IL-10 (69, 73) and circulating levels of TGFβ1 (74, 75)
are decreased. These data indicate a shift towards a pro-inflammatory
state in ASD. Furthermore, in a recent large population based case–
control study increased plasma cytokines levels were associated with
late onset of symptoms and greater impairment of communication
as well as more aberrant behaviors in ASD (39). These data suggest
that immune activation and atypical cytokine levels are directly
related to the behavioral symptoms in ASD and potentially represent a novel area for therapeutic intervention.
However, the literature on cytokines and ASD is not always
consistent and likely reflects complex patterns of immune activation
among different subgroups of individuals with ASD. The data is
further complicated by the use of siblings of children with ASD as
controls as these siblings are themselves often on a broader autism
phenotype spectrum (76). In addition to behavioral similarities in
siblings of children with ASD, researchers have demonstrated that
unaffected sibling often have immune profiles more similar to children with ASD than controls (77), i.e. the siblings are on a broader
behavioral and immune autism phenotype.

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

225

4. Innate Immune
Abnormalities
The immune system is generally described as having two arms: the
innate immune system which uses genetically encoded receptors
and nonspecific mechanisms to defend the host, and the adaptive
immune system which responds to a particular threat and develops
memory for future insults. These two systems work together to
protect the host and maintain proper homeostasis.
The innate immune system develops early during fetal development and appears to initially play more of a housekeeping role
than one of host defense. The earliest cells of this system derive
from primitive cells of the yolk sac (78–80). These cells migrate
from the yolk sac and eventually become the progenitors for both
the hematopoietic cells of the peripheral immune system as well as
the initial population of the CNS microglia. It was recently reported
that abnormalities in these innate CNS immune cells can directly
contribute to abnormal behaviors such as pathological grooming
in mice (81). In mice homozygous for a loss-of-function mutation
in Hoxb8 that reduces the number of peripherally derived microglia cells compulsive grooming and hair removal is observed, but
symptoms are improved upon bone marrow transplant from mice
without the associate gene mutation (81). In addition, in immune
deficient mice, cognitive impairments have been observed, but can
be improved when mice receive alternatively activated macrophages,
suggesting that epigenetic as well as genetic alternations in innate
immune cells can contribute to behavioral alterations (82). Notably,
many of the cytokines produced by innate immune cells such as
TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 mediate direct affect on neuronal
activity and are elevated in ASD (39).
These cytokines have multiple functions in the CNS which
vary with both dose and timing. TNF-α can induce neuronal cell
death and is thought to play an important role in synaptic pruning
(83, 84). However, depending on the local environment, dose,
and timing, TNF-α can also induce proliferation (85). This opposing function is also apparent in the actions of IL-1β and IL-6 which
have varied effects on neuronal survival and proliferation as well as
synapse formation, migration, and differentiation resulting in
altered or reduced neurogenesis (86–91).
Given the role of the innate immune system in both appropriate neuronal development and function, it is of great interest that
a numbers of studies have demonstrated abnormalities in innate
immune function in ASD. Significant findings include alterations
in natural killer (NK) cell activity (92). NK cells play an important
role in viral defense, tumor surveillance, and help maintain the
uterine environment during pregnancy. Early observations showed
that NK cell-mediated killing of the target cell K562 was lower in
some individuals with ASD (93). Similar results were found in a

226

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

larger multisite study, with nearly half of the individuals with ASD
being having low NK cell cytotoxicity activity against the target cell
(94). A more in-depth investigation into NK cell function in ASD
demonstrated that under resting conditions NK cells from young
children with ASD were more activated, potentially reflecting their
in vivo status, but when these cells were challenged in vitro in cultures
with K562 cells, they fail to kill the target cells or produce cytokines (92). In circulation, the numbers of NK cells are 40% higher
in children with ASD compared with controls, again reflecting
potential increases in the in vivo status of NK cells (95). This feature
has also been described in several autoimmune diseases and
suggests that the immune cells may be maximally stimulated in vivo
but cannot respond further once challenged. In addition to NK
cells, several studies have reported differences in monocytes
and macrophages in ASD.
Alterations in the function of cells of the myeloid lineage,
namely monocytes and macrophages, have been directly and indirectly reported in a number of studies in children with ASD.
Monocytes and macrophages share many similarities to their CNS
localized counterparts, the microglia, and may even contribute to
the microglial population (96, 97). Prominent microglia cell activation and infiltration of monocytes and macrophages is observed
in brain specimens of individuals with ASD (67). Moreover, powerful
transcriptome network mapping techniques highlight the presence of gene networks suggestive for microglial dysregulation in
the brains of subjects with ASD, a dysregulation that also appears
to be present in peripheral monocytes and macrophages (98).
Sweeten et al. reported increased number of circulating monocytes
in subjects with ASD (99). Moreover, plasma cytokine levels in
children with ASD show higher levels of the “monokines” IL-1β,
IL-6, and IL-12, which are produced predominantly by cells of the
myeloid lineage, i.e. monocytes and dendritic cells (39). Jyonouchi
et al. found that peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) when
stimulated with the innate immune activating TLR-4 agonist LPS
released more IL-1β in ASD compared to similarly treated cultures
from control subjects (100). In a subset of ASD patients with
recurrent infections, altered responses to a number of TLR ligands
were also demonstrated (101). These studies, however, used mixed
cultures of peripheral cells and it is unclear if the altered response
was from monocytes alone or from a more complex interaction
between monocytes and other cells including adaptive immune
cells. By using only isolated monocytes, Enstrom et al. attempted
to better elucidate innate immune findings in ASD and found that
IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α responses were elevated following TLR-2
stimulation and IL-1β production was higher following TLR-4
stimulation in children with ASD but not typically developing
controls (41). These increases in cytokines also correlated with
impairments in ASD-specific behaviors as measured by gold-standard

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

227

assessments. How this inappropriate immune response to pathogen
contributes to symptomology of ASD may be through direct
interactions between immune messengers and neuronal or neuroendocrine targets, or more circuitously by modulating the adaptive
immune response. However, monocytes isolated from subjects
with ASD showed a reduced production of IL-1β, IL-6, GM-CSF,
and TNF-α following challenge with TLR-9 ligands (41). This
differential innate immune response might explain the increased
rate of early childhood (first 30 days) infections seen in children
with ASD compared with typically developing controls (102).
During this early postnatal period, the adaptive immune system is
being educated and the body is most reliant on the innate immune
system for host defense.

5. Adaptive Immune
Abnormalities
The second arm of the immune system develops later in development
and does not fully mature until early childhood. Unlike the innate
immune system that is genetically coded to recognize and respond
to conserved pathogen markers, the adaptive immune system is
more dynamic and is educated to respond to pathogens and toxins
upon exposure. Similar to the innate immune system, however, the
adaptive immune system can also affect both neuronal development
and function (reviewed in ref. (103)).
Rodent models have provided much of the evidence that the
adaptive immune can alter neuronal development and function. In
mice strains lacking an adaptive immune system, or specific elements of it, cognitive deficits have been observed (104). This has
also been demonstrated in mice strains with typical immune system where T-cells are depleted (105). The exact mechanism by
which T-cells modulate neuronal function is not fully understood;
however, in neuronal injury models, CD4+ T-cells have been
shown to mediate neuronal survival in an IL-4/STAT6-dependent
manner (106, 107). IL-4 has recently been shown to regulate
learning and memory by modulating the innate immune system,
demonstrating the importance of cross-talk between both arms of the
immune system in maintaining neuronal homeostasis (108, 109).
Cellular studies in ASD have demonstrated functional alterations in the adaptive immune response. Early work by Stubbs was
the first to suggest irregularities in cellular immune function in
ASD; however, this early study was small and poorly controlled
(110). Further work was performed by Warren et al., who found
T-cell abnormalities, including skewed CD4:CD8 T-cell numbers
and altered antigen recall responses (111). More recent work has
shown the same decreases in T-cell numbers but only in children
with ASD that also have gastrointestinal issues (112) and may

228

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

reflect the efflux of T-cells from the periphery into the mucosa in
this subset of ASD individuals. Cellular markers show that there is
an altered T-cell activation in children with ASD, suggesting an
incomplete or altered activation profile (40, 73, 113). A skewing
towards a TH2 cytokine profile has been hypothesized for ASD
(114). However, as is true for most human research the pattern of
cytokines produced in T-cells in ASD is complex and do not easily
fit into the traditional TH2 classification. In a recent study, dynamic
T-cell function following stimulation with PHA was assessed in 63
children with ASD and 73 age-matched typically developing
controls. After stimulation, levels of GM-CSF, TNF-α, and IL-13
were increased and IL-12 (p40) was decreased in subjects with
ASD compared with controls. Furthermore, the induced cytokine
production was found to be associated with altered behaviors in
children with ASD, such that increased pro-inflammatory or TH1
cytokine production was associated with greater impairments in
core features of ASD as well as aberrant behaviors (39). In contrast, production of GM-CSF and TH2 cytokines was associated
with better cognitive and adaptive function (40). Taken together,
these findings suggest that altered T-cell activation and function
are present in ASD and likely play a role in the ongoing pathophysiological process.
Currently no studies exist that have directly studied B-cell
function in ASD; however, there are several lines of indirect evidence
that suggest altered B-cell dysfunction is present in individuals with
ASD. The primary role of B-cells is the production of immunoglobins against pathogens. In order to best protect the host, B-cells
produce a variety of immunoglobins, each with a dedicated role
and in some cases specificity to a particular tissue. IgA is present
mainly in mucosal tissue where it serves as a sentinel against pathogens. Deficiencies in IgA are associated with increased infections
(115). In ASD, lower circulating levels of IgA have previously been
reported (116); however, more recent studies have not validated
this finding (42, 117, 118). Instead, reduced production of the
IgM and IgG classes of immunoglobins has been reported, with
lower levels found to correlate with more aberrant behaviors (42).
Further evidence of imbalance of antibody levels was reported in a
recent study that looked at IgG levels in neonatal blood. At this
developmental age, most IgG present in the neonate will be maternal
derived via placenta transfer. IgG levels were found to be lower in
children who went on to develop ASD (119). Analysis of specific
IgG subclasses in children with ASD found that although total
levels for IgG are low, the less abundant IgG2 subtype (118) and
IgG4 subtype (117, 118) are elevated in ASD compared with
controls. Interestingly, IgG2 is important for immune responses to
carbohydrate antigens, and increases in this subtype of IgG might
suggest increased exposure to specific pathogens. IgG4 functions
as a blocking antibody and is associated with chronic infection.
It has also been shown to function as a pathogenic antibody in

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

229

certain autoimmune disorders (120). Differences in Ig levels in
plasma or sera could reflect differences in absolute B-cells numbers,
as children with ASD have been reported to have 20% more B-cells
on average when compared with controls (95) but that immature
CD5+ B-cells predominate. In addition to altered immunoglobulin
levels, a number of autoantibodies reactive to brain and CNS tissue
have been identified in ASD.

6. Autoantibodies
in ASD
The presence of antibodies directed against fetal brain or CNS tissue
but not adult brain tissue has been repeatedly reported in children
with ASD (reviewed in refs. (65, 121)). Several studies demonstrated that subjects with ASD possess autoantibodies directed
against specific neurological targets, including serotonin receptors
(122), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (123), myelin
basic protein (MBP) (123, 124), neuron-axon acidic protein
(NAFP) (125), and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (125).
However, specificity of these antibodies is not the same across studies
and there has been difficulty in replicating studies showing antibodies to specific targets such as MBP or GFAP (126, 127). It is
also clear that these antibodies are not present in all individuals
with ASD (128).
In addition to specific neuronal targets, a number of unidentified
neuronal targets have also been detected and appear to be associated with certain behavioral endophenotype in ASD. Antibodies
recognizing a 45 kDa cerebellum protein were found more frequently in children with ASD and were associated with lower adaptive and cognitive function, as well as increases in aberrant behaviors
(121, 129). Further evaluation of these neuronal targets has suggested that they are presented on or in GABAergic neurons,
although not all GABAergic neurons are targeted by these autoantibodies (130). Although it is unclear if any of these autoantibodies
have direct pathogenic relevance, or are secondary to previous cellular damage or inflammatory reactions, these studies provide provocative evidence that specific molecular targets represent a possible
means by which these autoantibodies are pathogenic and could
reveal a subgroup of children with ASD with distinct immune
dysfunction.

7. Mucosal
Immunity in Autism
It is now accepted that a significant number of individuals with
ASD have frequent gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. The most
commonly described GI symptoms are increases in constipation or

230

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

diarrhea and food insensitivities/food allergies. The latter finding
has led some investigators to focus on immunological responses to
dietary proteins such as gluten and casein. Jyonouchi et al. (100)
found that PBMC responses to gliadin, cow’s milk protein, and soy
were increased in children with ASD and GI symptoms compared
with control children. However, children with ASD in this study
were selected on the basis of having previously seen behavior
improvements on a restricted diet, and therefore the adverse
responses to dietary peptides may be restricted to a specific endophenotype of ASD. In mucosal tissue obtained during colonoscopy
and endoscopy, children with ASD who have GI symptoms show
increased pan-enteric infiltration of T-cells, monocytes, NK cells,
and eosinophils, a finding that suggests there is mucosal immune
activation, leading to increased homing of cells to the mucosa,
likely as a result of increased cytokine and chemokine signaling
(112, 131–133). Isolation of lamina propria mononuclear cells
showed increased frequencies of T-cells that were positive for
TNF-α in duodenum, ileum, and colonic tissue specimens from
children with ASD compared to noninflamed GI symptom controls, and children with celiac disease or inflammatory bowel diseases (69, 73, 112). Concurrently with increased TNFα production
there were demonstrable decreases in lower IL-10 production,
indicating a shift to a pro-inflammatory environment. Moreover,
antibodies directed against the basal membrane and the basal surface of gut epithelium were also observed in children with ASD
(131, 132). These autoantibodies may be representative of an
autoimmune response directed at the epithelial barrier, one that
could lead to the perturbation of the epithelial barrier and potentially increased permeability. In line with this hypothesis, several
groups have shown increased gut permeability in individuals with
ASD (134, 135). However, there is still controversy regarding the
size of the ASD population that suffers from GI symptoms. A retrospective study examining 589 subjects with idiopathic, familial
ASD and 163 of their unaffected sibling controls found a more
than twofold rate, 42% compared with 19%, of GI issues in subjects
with ASD compared to their sibling. Furthermore, the presence of
GI issues correlated with increased severity of behaviors in ASD
(136). Whether GI symptoms are representative or GI pathology,
and how this is associated with behavioral symptoms is still not
known. A few small studies suggest that GI symptoms in ASD are
associated with increased aggression and hyperactivity but these
studies need further replication (137, 138). Some studies suggest
that an abnormal immune response to dietary peptides could contribute to behavioral abnormalities associated with ASD and may
represent a fruitful avenue for therapeutic intervention (139).

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

231

8. Immunogenetics
in ASD
ASD is one of the most heritable psychological disorders, with a
70–80% concordance rates among monozygotic twins and a
30–40% concordance rate among dizygotic twins (140–143). Even
among nontwin siblings, there is a 25-fold increased risk of developing ASD when compared to the general population, suggesting
a strong genetic component in the pathogenesis of this disorder
(144). However, variations in primary symptoms domains are present in twins, with the most variance existing in repetitive behaviors
and interests (142). Despite the strong evidence for a genetic component in ASD, studies have failed to pinpoint a single gene responsible for ASD, and instead a number of genes have been implicated.
These genes vary widely among individuals and family clusters, but
together they appear to be involved in important physiological systems including synapse formation, neuronal migration, and
immune function.
Among the genes implicated in ASD, restriction of HLA genes
is often reported and is associated with increased risk of developing
ASD (145–149). The HLA genes are located within a large
genomic region referred to as the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) on chromosome 6. These genes are involved in
immune function and are among the strongest predictors of risk
for autoimmune conditions, and in addition to ASD have been
associated with neurodevelopmental disorders such as schizophrenia (150). Several studies have found that a number of HLA haplotypes, in particular HLA-DR4, occur more often in children with
ASD compared to the general population (146–149). However,
two studies by Guerini et al. (151, 152) found that there was no
apparent HLA linkage, and instead there are several microsatellite
linkages within the MHC which are associated with ASD. This
suggests that genetic abnormalities in the MHC are not solely
confined to HLA genes themselves but that other immune genes
in the region may be indicated.
Another gene associated with ASD in the MHC region is the
gene coding for the complement protein C4. Complement is an
important element of innate immunity and is vital in protecting the
host from a number of infectious agents as well as synapse pruning
in the CNS. Deficiencies in complement protein C4 have been
associated with autoimmune disorders such as SLE (153). In ASD,
deficiencies in the C4B allele, as well as its protein product, have
been reported (154–157). Furthermore, proteomic analyses of
sera samples indicate that several complement proteins are
differential produced in ASD (158).
A number of other ASD candidate genes have been identified
that are integral to immune function. These include macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) (159), MET tyrosine receptors

232

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

(160, 161), serine and threonine kinase C gene PRKCB1 (162),
and reelin (163–165). In addition, a number of syndromic disorders with high rates of ASD are defined by alterations in genes with
significant roles in immune regulation including tuberous sclerosis
complex (either TSC1 or TSC2) (Tuberous Sclerosis) (21), protein
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) (Cowden’s Syndrome)
(166), calcium channel, L type, alpha-1 polypeptide (CACNA1C)
(Timothy Syndrome) (167), methyl CpG binding protein 2
(MeCP2) (Rett’s Syndrome) (168). Many of these genes are
involved in key cellular pathways such as the mTOR/Akt pathway
utilized by both the nervous and immune system. The mTOR/Akt
pathway is involved in immune signaling, activation, and survival,
and alterations to genes within this pathway may contribute to the
immune dysfunction seen in ASD (reviewed in ref. (64)). However,
it is currently unclear how dysregulation of these pathways contributes to the development of ASD, or to what degree the immune
response is involved.

9. Conclusion
The nervous and immune systems are intimately tied together, and
immune cells and their products are capable of directly alerting
neuronal architecture and function. A convergence of evidence
from a number of disciplines has demonstrated the presence of
immune dysregulation in ASD, both in the children and parents.
This inappropriate immune function can have devastating effects,
and both epidemiological and animal model studies suggest that an
inappropriate immune response during early development can lead
to neurodevelopmental disorders including ASD. Much remains to
be understood about the precise mechanism by which the immune
system contributes to the pathology of ASD as well as how genetic
and environmental factors contribute to the heterogeneity of core
features. Further research is needed to elucidate these questions,
but it is clear the immune system offers many avenues for better
understanding as well as possible targets for therapies in ASD.
References
1. American Psychiatric Association (1994)
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, 4th edn. American Psychiatric
Association, Washington, DC
2. Fombonne E (2003) Epidemiological surveys
of autism and other pervasive developmental
disorders: an update. J Autism Dev Disord
33:365–382

3. King M, Bearman P (2009) Diagnostic
change and the increased prevalence of autism.
Int J Epidemiol 38:1224–1234
4. Money J, Bobrow NA, Clarke FC (1971)
Autism and autoimmune disease: a family
study. J Autism Child Schizophr 1:146–160
5. Cooper GS, Bynum ML, Somers EC (2009)
Recent insights in the epidemiology of

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

autoimmune diseases: improved prevalence
estimates and understanding of clustering of
diseases. J Autoimmun 33:197–207
6. Croen LA, Grether JK, Yoshida CK, Odouli
R, Van de Water J (2005) Maternal autoimmune diseases, asthma and allergies, and
childhood autism spectrum disorders: a case–
control study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
159:151–157
7. Atladottir HO, Pedersen MG, Thorsen P,
Mortensen PB, Deleuran B, Eaton WW,
Parner ET (2009) Association of family history of autoimmune diseases and autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 124:687–694
8. Valicenti-McDermott MD, McVicar K,
Cohen HJ, Wershil BK, Shinnar S (2008)
Gastrointestinal symptoms in children with an
autism spectrum disorder and language
regression. Pediatr Neurol 39:392–398
9. Keil A, Daniels JL, Forssen U, Hultman C,
Cnattingius S, Soderberg KC, Feychting M,
Sparen P (2010) Parental autoimmune diseases associated with autism spectrum disorders in offspring. Epidemiology 21:805–808
10. Mouridsen SE, Rich B, Isager T, Nedergaard
NJ (2007) Autoimmune diseases in parents of
children with infantile autism: a case–control
study. Dev Med Child Neurol 49:429–432
11. Mostafa GA, Kitchener N (2009) Serum antinuclear antibodies as a marker of autoimmunity in Egyptian autistic children. Pediatr
Neurol 40:107–112
12. Molloy CA, Morrow AL, Meinzen-Derr J,
Dawson G, Bernier R, Dunn M, Hyman SL,
McMahon WM, Goudie-Nice J, Hepburn S,
Minshew N, Rogers S, Sigman M, Spence
MA, Tager-Flusberg H, Volkmar FR, Lord C
(2006) Familial autoimmune thyroid disease
as a risk factor for regression in children with
Autism Spectrum Disorder: a CPEA study.
J Autism Dev Disord 36:317–324
13. Sweeten TL, Bowyer SL, Posey DJ,
Halberstadt GM, McDougle CJ (2003)
Increased prevalence of familial autoimmunity
in probands with pervasive developmental
disorders. Pediatrics 112:e420
14. Comi AM, Zimmerman AW, Frye VH, Law
PA, Peeden JN (1999) Familial clustering of
autoimmune disorders and evaluation of
medical risk factors in autism. J Child Neurol
14:388–394
15. Mor G, Cardenas I (2010) The immune system in pregnancy: a unique complexity. Am
J Reprod Immunol 63:425–433
16. Brown AS, Derkits EJ (2010) Prenatal infection and schizophrenia: a review of epidemiologic and translational studies. Am J Psychiatry
167:261–280

233

17. Chess S (1977) Follow-up report on autism
in congenital rubella. J Autism Child
Schizophr 7:69–81
18. Libbey JE, Sweeten TL, McMahon WM,
Fujinami RS (2005) Autistic disorder and
viral infections. J Neurovirol 11:1–10
19. Sweeten TL, Posey DJ, McDougle CJ (2004)
Brief report: autistic disorder in three children
with cytomegalovirus infection. J Autism Dev
Disord 34:583–586
20. Atladottir HO, Thorsen P, Ostergaard L,
Schendel DE, Lemcke S, Abdallah M, Parner
ET (2010) Maternal infection requiring hospitalization during pregnancy and autism
spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord
40:1423–1430
21. Wiznitzer M (2004) Autism and tuberous
sclerosis. J Child Neurol 19:675–679
22. Ehninger D, Sano Y, de Vries PJ, Dies K,
Franz D, Geschwind DH, Kaur M, Lee YS, Li
W, Lowe JK, Nakagawa JA, Sahin M, Smith
K, Whittemore V, Silva AJ (2012) Gestational
immune activation and Tsc2 haploinsufficiency
cooperate to disrupt fetal survival and may
perturb social behavior in adult mice. Mol
Psychiatry 17(1):62–70
23. Smith SEP, Hsiao E, Patterson PH (2010)
Activation of the maternal immune system as
a risk factor for neuropsychiatric disorders. In:
Zimmerman AW, Connors SL (eds) Maternal
influences on fetal neurodevelopment.
Springer, New York, pp 97–115
24. Borrell J, Vela JM, Arevalo-Martin A, MolinaHolgado E, Guaza C (2002) Prenatal immune
challenge disrupts sensorimotor gating in adult
rats. Implications for the etiopathogenesis of
schizophrenia. Neuropsychopharmacology 26:
204–215
25. Gilmore JH, Jarskog LF, Vadlamudi S (2005)
Maternal poly I:C exposure during pregnancy
regulates TNF alpha, BDNF, and NGF
expression in neonatal brain and the maternal-fetal unit of the rat. J Neuroimmunol
159:106–112
26. Hsiao EY, Patterson PH (2011) Activation of
the maternal immune system induces endocrine changes in the placenta via IL-6. Brain
Behav Immun 25(4):604–615
27. Meyer U, Nyffeler M, Yee BK, Knuesel I,
Feldon J (2008) Adult brain and behavioral
pathological markers of prenatal immune
challenge during early/middle and late fetal
development in mice. Brain Behav Immun
22:469–486
28. Jonakait GM (2007) The effects of maternal
inflammation on neuronal development: possible mechanisms. Int J Dev Neurosci
25:415–425

234

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

29. Smith SE, Li J, Garbett K, Mirnics K,
Patterson PH (2007) Maternal immune activation alters fetal brain development through
interleukin-6. J Neurosci 27:10695–10702
30. Parker-Athill E, Luo D, Bailey A, Giunta B,
Tian J, Shytle RD, Murphy T, Legradi G, Tan
J (2009) Flavonoids, a prenatal prophylaxis
via targeting JAK2/STAT3 signaling to
oppose IL-6/MIA associated autism.
J Neuroimmunol 217:20–27
31. Zalcman SS (2002) Interleukin-2-induced
increases in climbing behavior: inhibition by
dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptor antagonists.
Brain Res 944:157–164
32. Ponzio NM, Servatius R, Beck K, Marzouk A,
Kreider T (2007) Cytokine levels during
pregnancy influence immunological profiles
and neurobehavioral patterns of the offspring.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 1107:118–128
33. Abazyan B, Nomura J, Kannan G, Ishizuka K,
Tamashiro KL, Nucifora F, Pogorelov V,
Ladenheim B, Yang C, Krasnova IN (2010)
Prenatal interaction of mutant DISC1 and
immune activation produces adult psychopathology. Biol Psychiatry 68:1172–1181
34. Lasala N, Zhou H (2007) Effects of maternal
exposure to LPS on the inflammatory response
in the offspring. J Neuroimmunol 189:
95–101
35. Surriga O, Ortega A, Jadeja V, Bellafronte A,
Lasala N, Zhou H (2009) Altered hepatic
inflammatory response in the offspring following prenatal LPS exposure. Immunol Lett
123:88–95
36. Mandal M, Marzouk AC, Donnelly R, Ponzio
NM (2010) Preferential development of
Th17 cells in offspring of immunostimulated
pregnant mice. J Reprod Immunol 87:
97–100
37. Mandal M, Marzouk AC, Donnelly R, Ponzio
NM (2011) Maternal immune stimulation
during pregnancy affects adaptive immunity
in offspring to promote development of
TH17 cells. Brain Behav Immun 25:
863–871
38. Ashwood P, Krakowiak P, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Hansen R, Pessah IN, Van de Water J (2011)
Associations of impaired behaviors with elevated
plasma chemokines in autism spectrum disorders. J Neuroimmunol 232(1–2):196–199
39. Ashwood P, Krakowiak P, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Hansen R, Pessah I, Van de Water J (2011)
Elevated plasma cytokines in autism spectrum
disorders provide evidence of immune dysfunction and are associated with impaired
behavioral outcome. Brain Behav Immun
25:40–45

40. Ashwood P, Krakowiak P, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Hansen R, Pessah IN, Van de Water J (2011)
Altered T cell responses in children with
autism. Brain Behav Immun 25(5):840–849
41. Enstrom AM, Onore CE, Van de Water JA,
Ashwood P (2010) Differential monocyte
responses to TLR ligands in children with
autism spectrum disorders. Brain Behav
Immun 24:64–71
42. Heuer L, Ashwood P, Schauer J, Goines P,
Krakowiak P, Hertz-Picciotto I, Hansen R,
Croen LA, Pessah IN, Van de Water J (2008)
Reduced levels of immunoglobulin in children with autism correlates with behavioral
symptoms. Autism Res 1:275–283
43. Sandler RH, Finegold SM, Bolte ER,
Buchanan CP, Maxwell AP, Vaisanen ML,
Nelson MN, Wexler HM (2000) Short-term
benefit from oral vancomycin treatment of
regressive-onset autism. J Child Neurol
15:429–435
44. Tincani A, Rebaioli CB, Frassi M, Taglietti M,
Gorla R, Cavazzana I, Faden D, Taddei F,
Lojacono A, Motta M, Trepidi L, Meroni P,
Cimaz R, Ghirardello A, Doria A, Pisoni MP,
Muscara M, Brucato A (2005) Pregnancy and
autoimmunity: maternal treatment and maternal disease influence on pregnancy outcome.
Autoimmun Rev 4:423–428
45. Lee JY, Huerta PT, Zhang J, Kowal C, Bertini
E, Volpe BT, Diamond B (2009) Neurotoxic
autoantibodies mediate congenital cortical
impairment of offspring in maternal lupus.
Nat Med 15:91–96
46. Neri F, Chimini L, Bonomi F, Filippini E,
Motta M, Faden D, Lojacono A, Rebaioli CB,
Frassi M, Danieli E, Tincani A (2004)
Neuropsychological development of children
born to patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus 13:805–811
47. McAllister DL, Kaplan BJ, Edworthy SM,
Martin L, Crawford SG, Ramsey-Goldman R,
Manzi S, Fries JF, Sibley J (1997) The
influence of systemic lupus erythematosus on
fetal development: cognitive, behavioral, and
health trends. J Int Neuropsychol Soc
3:370–376
48. Tincani A, Danieli E, Nuzzo M, Scarsil M,
Motta M, Cimaz R, Lojacono A, Nacinovich
R, Taddei F, Doria A, Brucato A, Meroni P
(2006) Impact of in utero environment on
the offspring of lupus patients. Lupus
15:801–807
49. Fu J, Jiang Y, Liang L, Zhu H (2005) Risk
factors of primary thyroid dysfunction in early
infants born to mothers with autoimmune
thyroid disease. Acta Paediatr 94:1043–1048

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

50. Rolim A, Castro M, Santiago M (2006)
Neonatal antiphospholipid syndrome. Lupus
15:301
51. Braunschweig D, Ashwood P, Krakowiak P,
Hertz-Picciotto I, Hansen R, Croen LA,
Pessah IN, Van de Water J (2008) Autism:
maternally derived antibodies specific for fetal
brain proteins. Neurotoxicology 29:226–231
52. Silva SC, Correia C, Fesel C, Barreto M,
Coutinho AM, Marques C, Miguel TS, Ataide
A, Bento C, Borges L, Oliveira G, Vicente
AM (2004) Autoantibody repertoires to brain
tissue in autism nuclear families. J
Neuroimmunol 152:176–182
53. Zimmerman AW, Connors SL, Matteson KJ,
Lee LC, Singer HS, Castaneda JA, Pearce DA
(2007) Maternal antibrain antibodies in
autism. Brain Behav Immun 21:351–357
54. Klauck SM, Poustka A (2006) Animal models
of autism. Drug Discov Today Dis Models
3:313–318
55. Martin LA, Ashwood P, Braunschweig D,
Cabanlit M, Van de Water J, Amaral DG
(2008) Stereotypies and hyperactivity in rhesus monkeys exposed to IgG from mothers of
children with autism. Brain Behav Immun
22:806–816
56. Singer HS, Morris C, Gause C, Pollard M,
Zimmerman AW, Pletnikov M (2009) Prenatal
exposure to antibodies from mothers of children with autism produces neurobehavioral
alterations: a pregnant dam mouse model. J
Neuroimmunol 211:39–48
57. Deverman BE, Patterson PH (2009)
Cytokines and CNS development. Neuron
64:61–78
58. Silverman MN, Pearce BD, Biron CA, Miller
AH (2005) Immune modulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis during
viral infection. Viral Immunol 18:41–78
59. Schwartz M, Kipnis J (2011) A conceptual
revolution in the relationships between the
brain and immunity. Brain Behav Immun
25(5):817–819
60. Strous RD, Shoenfeld Y (2006) Schizophrenia,
autoimmunity and immune system dysregulation: a comprehensive model updated and
revisited. J Autoimmun 27:71–80
61. Murphy TK, Kurlan R, Leckman J (2010)
The immunobiology of Tourette’s disorder,
pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with Streptococcus, and
related disorders: a way forward. J Child
Adolesc Psychopharmacol 20:317–331
62. Dantzer R, O’Connor JC, Freund GG,
Johnson RW, Kelley KW (2008) From
inflammation to sickness and depression:

235

when the immune system subjugates the
brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:46–56
63. Eaton WW, Pedersen MG, Nielsen PR,
Mortensen PB (2010) Autoimmune diseases,
bipolar disorder, and non-affective psychosis.
Bipolar Disord 12:638–646
64. Careaga M, Van de Water J, Ashwood P
(2010) Immune dysfunction in autism: a
pathway to treatment. Neurotherapeutics
7:283–292
65. Enstrom AM, Van de Water JA, Ashwood P
(2009) Autoimmunity in autism. Curr Opin
Investig Drugs 10:463–473
66. Goines P, Van de Water J (2010) The immune
system’s role in the biology of autism. Curr
Opin Neurol 23:111–117. doi:110.1097/
WCO.1090b1013e3283373514
67. Vargas DL, Nascimbene C, Krishnan C,
Zimmerman AW, Pardo CA (2005) Neuroglial
activation and neuroinflammation in the brain
of patients with autism. Ann Neurol
57:67–81
68. Li X, Chauhan A, Sheikh AM, Patil S,
Chauhan V, Li X-M, Ji L, Brown T, Malik M
(2009) Elevated immune response in the
brain of autistic patients. J Neuroimmunol
207:111–116
69. Ashwood P, Anthony A, Torrente F, Wakefield
AJ (2004) Spontaneous mucosal lymphocyte
cytokine profiles in children with autism and
gastrointestinal symptoms: mucosal immune
activation and reduced counter regulatory
interleukin-10. J Clin Immunol 24:664–673
70. Jyonouchi H, Sun S, Le H (2001)
Proinflammatory and regulatory cytokine
production associated with innate and adaptive immune responses in children with autism
spectrum disorders and developmental regression. J Neuroimmunol 120:170–179
71. Singh VK, Warren RP, Odell JD, Cole P
(1991) Changes of soluble interleukin-2,
interleukin-2 receptor, T8 antigen, and interleukin-1 in the serum of autistic children. Clin
Immunol Immunopathol 61:448–455
72. Singh VK (1996) Plasma increase of interleukin-12 and interferon-gamma. Pathological
significance in autism. J Neuroimmunol
66:143–145
73. Ashwood P, Wakefield AJ (2006) Immune
activation of peripheral blood and mucosal
CD3+ lymphocyte cytokine profiles in children with autism and gastrointestinal symptoms. J Neuroimmunol 173:126–134
74. Ashwood P, Enstrom A, Krakowiak P, HertzPicciotto I, Hansen RL, Croen LA, Ozonoff
S, Pessah IN, Van de Water J (2008) Decreased
transforming growth factor beta1 in autism: a

236

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

potential link between immune dysregulation
and impairment in clinical behavioral outcomes. J Neuroimmunol 204:149–153
75. Okada K, Hashimoto K, Iwata Y, Nakamura
K, Tsujii M, Tsuchiya KJ, Sekine Y, Suda S,
Suzuki K, Sugihara G, Matsuzaki H, Sugiyama
T, Kawai M, Minabe Y, Takei N, Mori N
(2007) Decreased serum levels of transforming growth factor-beta1 in patients with
autism. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry 31:187–190
76. Constantino JN, Zhang Y, Frazier T, Abbacchi
AM, Law P (2010) Sibling recurrence and
the genetic epidemiology of autism. Am J
Psychiatry 167:1349–1356
77. Saresella M, Marventano I, Guerini FR,
Mancuso R, Ceresa L, Zanzottera M, Rusconi
B, Maggioni E, Tinelli C, Clerici M (2009)
An autistic endophenotype results in complex
immune dysfunction in healthy siblings of
autistic children. Biol Psychiatry 66:978–984
78. Alliot F, Godin I, Pessac B (1999) Microglia
derive from progenitors, originating from the
yolk sac, and which proliferate in the brain.
Brain Res Dev Brain Res 117:145–152
79. Ginhoux F, Greter M, Leboeuf M, Nandi S,
See P, Gokhan S, Mehler MF, Conway SJ, Ng
LG, Stanley ER, Samokhvalov IM, Merad M
(2010) Fate mapping analysis reveals that
adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages. Science 330:841–845
80. Palis J, Yoder MC (2001) Yolk-sac hematopoiesis: the first blood cells of mouse and man.
Exp Hematol 29:927–936
81. Chen SK, Tvrdik P, Peden E, Cho S, Wu S,
Spangrude G, Capecchi MR (2010)
Hematopoietic origin of pathological grooming in Hoxb8 mutant mice. Cell 141:
775–785
82. Derecki NC, Quinnies KM, Kipnis J (2011)
Alternatively activated myeloid (M2) cells
enhance cognitive function in immune compromised mice. Brain Behav Immun
25(3):379–385
83. Cacci E, Claasen JH, Kokaia Z (2005)
Microglia-derived tumor necrosis factor-alpha
exaggerates death of newborn hippocampal
progenitor cells in vitro. J Neurosci Res
80:789–797
84. Stellwagen D, Malenka RC (2006) Synaptic
scaling mediated by glial TNF-alpha. Nature
440:1054–1059
85. Widera D, Mikenberg I, Elvers M, Kaltschmidt
C, Kaltschmidt B (2006) Tumor necrosis factor alpha triggers proliferation of adult neural
stem cells via IKK/NF-kappaB signaling.
BMC Neurosci 7:64

86. Banks WA, Farr SA, La Scola ME, Morley JE
(2001) Intravenous human interleukin-1
alpha impairs memory processing in mice:
dependence on blood–brain barrier transport
into posterior division of the septum.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 299:536–541
87. Depino AM, Alonso M, Ferrari C, del Rey A,
Anthony D, Besedovsky H, Medina JH,
Pitossi F (2004) Learning modulation by
endogenous hippocampal IL-1: blockade of
endogenous IL-1 facilitates memory formation. Hippocampus 14:526–535
88. Goshen I, Yirmiya R (2009) Interleukin-1
(IL-1): a central regulator of stress responses.
Front Neuroendocrinol 30:30–45
89. Schneider H, Pitossi F, Balschun D, Wagner
A, del Rey A, Besedovsky HO (1998) A neuromodulatory role of interleukin-1beta in the
hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
95:7778–7783
90. Baier PC, May U, Scheller J, Rose-John S,
Schiffelholz T (2009) Impaired hippocampus-dependent and -independent learning in
IL-6 deficient mice. Behav Brain Res
200:192–196
91. Harden LM, du Plessis I, Poole S, Laburn HP
(2008) Interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-1 beta act
synergistically within the brain to induce
sickness behavior and fever in rats. Brain
Behav Immun 22:838–849
92. Enstrom AM, Lit L, Onore CE, Gregg JP,
Hansen RL, Pessah IN, Hertz-Picciotto I,
Van de Water JA, Sharp FR, Ashwood P
(2009) Altered gene expression and function
of peripheral blood natural killer cells in children with autism. Brain Behav Immun
23:124–133
93. Warren RP, Foster A, Margaretten NC (1987)
Reduced natural killer cell activity in autism.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 26:
333–335
94. Vojdani A, Mumper E, Granpeesheh D,
Mielke L, Traver D, Bock K, Hirani K,
Neubrander J, Woeller KN, O’Hara N, Usman
A, Schneider C, Hebroni F, Berookhim J,
McCandless J (2008) Low natural killer cell
cytotoxic activity in autism: the role of glutathione, IL-2 and IL-15. J Neuroimmunol
205:148–154
95. Ashwood P, Corbett BA, Kantor A, Schulman
H, Van de Water J, Amaral DG (2011) In
search of cellular immunophenotypes in the
blood of children with autism. PLoS One
6:e19299
96. Wilson EH, Weninger W, Hunter CA (2010)
Trafficking of immune cells in the central nervous system. J Clin Invest 120:1368–1379

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

97. Lima FRS, da Fonseca ACC, Faria GP, Dubois
LGF, Alves TR, Faria J, Neto VM (2010) The
origin of microglia and the development of
the brain. In: Ulrich H (ed) Perspectives of
stem cells. Springer, Netherlands, pp
171–189
98. Voineagu I, Wang X, Johnston P, Lowe JK,
Tian Y, Horvath S, Mill J, Cantor RM,
Blencowe BJ, Geschwind DH (2011)
Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals
convergent molecular pathology. Nature
474:380–384
99. Sweeten TL, Posey DJ, McDougle CJ (2003)
High blood monocyte counts and neopterin
levels in children with autistic disorder. Am J
Psychiatry 160:1691–1693
100. Jyonouchi H, Sun S, Itokazu N (2002) Innate
immunity associated with inflammatory
responses and cytokine production against
common dietary proteins in patients with
autism spectrum disorder. Neuropsychobiology
46:76–84
101. Jyonouchi H, Geng L, Cushing-Ruby A,
Quraishi H (2008) Impact of innate immunity in a subset of children with autism spectrum disorders: a case control study. J
Neuroinflammation 5:52
102. Rosen NJ, Yoshida CK, Croen LA (2007)
Infection in the first 2 years of life and autism
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 119:e61–e69
103. Moynihan JA, Santiago FM (2007) Brain
behavior and immunity: twenty years of
T cells. Brain Behav Immun 21:872–880
104. Ziv Y, Ron N, Butovsky O, Landa G, Sudai E,
Greenberg N, Cohen H, Kipnis J, Schwartz
M (2006) Immune cells contribute to the
maintenance of neurogenesis and spatial
learning abilities in adulthood. Nat Neurosci
9:268–275
105. Kipnis J, Cohen H, Cardon M, Ziv Y,
Schwartz M (2004) T cell deficiency leads to
cognitive dysfunction: implications for therapeutic vaccination for schizophrenia and other
psychiatric conditions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 101:8180–8185
106. Serpe CJ, Coers S, Sanders VM, Jones KJ
(2003) CD4+ T, but not CD8+ or B, lymphocytes mediate facial motoneuron survival
after facial nerve transection. Brain Behav
Immun 17:393–402
107. Deboy CA, Xin J, Byram SC, Serpe CJ,
Sanders VM, Jones KJ (2006) Immunemediated neuroprotection of axotomized
mouse facial motoneurons is dependent on
the IL-4/STAT6 signaling pathway in
CD4(+) T cells. Exp Neurol 201:212–224

237

108. Derecki NC, Cardani AN, Yang CH, Quinnies
KM, Crihfield A, Lynch KR, Kipnis J (2010)
Regulation of learning and memory by meningeal immunity: a key role for IL-4. J Exp
Med 207:1067–1080
109. Fairweather D, Cihakova D (2009)
Alternatively activated macrophages in infection and autoimmunity. J Autoimmun 33:
222–230
110. Stubbs EG (1976) Autistic children exhibit
undetectable
hemagglutination-inhibition
antibody titers despite previous rubella vaccination. J Autism Child Schizophr 6:269–274
111. Warren RP, Margaretten NC, Pace NC, Foster
A (1986) Immune abnormalities in patients
with autism. J Autism Dev Disord 16:189–197
112. Ashwood P, Anthony A, Pellicer AA, Torrente
F, Walker-Smith JA, Wakefield AJ (2003)
Intestinal lymphocyte populations in children
with regressive autism: evidence for extensive
mucosal immunopathology. J Clin Immunol
23:504–517
113. Plioplys AV, Greaves A, Kazemi K, Silverman
E (1994) Lymphocyte function in autism and
Rett syndrome. Neuropsychobiology 29:
12–16
114. Gupta S, Aggarwal S, Rashanravan B, Lee T
(1998) Th1- and Th2-like cytokines in CD4+
and CD8+ T cells in autism. J Neuroimmunol
85:106–109
115. Aghamohammadi A, Cheraghi T, Gharagozlou
M, Movahedi M, Rezaei N, Yeganeh M,
Parvaneh N, Abolhassani H, Pourpak Z,
Moin M (2009) IgA deficiency: correlation
between clinical and immunological phenotypes. J Clin Immunol 29:130–136
116. Warren RP, Odell JD, Warren WL, Burger
RA, Maciulis A, Daniels WW, Torres AR
(1997) Brief report: immunoglobulin
A deficiency in a subset of autistic subjects.
J Autism Dev Disord 27:187–192
117. Enstrom A, Krakowiak P, Onore C, Pessah
IN, Hertz-Picciotto I, Hansen RL, Van de
Water JA, Ashwood P (2009) Increased IgG4
levels in children with autism disorder. Brain
Behav Immun 23:389–395
118. Croonenberghs J, Wauters A, Devreese K,
Verkerk R, Scharpe S, Bosmans E, Egyed B,
Deboutte D, Maes M (2002) Increased serum
albumin, gamma globulin, immunoglobulin
IgG, and IgG2 and IgG4 in autism. Psychol
Med 32:1457–1463
119. Grether JK, Croen LA, Anderson MC, Nelson
KB, Yolken RH (2010) Neonatally measured
immunoglobulins and risk of autism. Autism
Res 3:323–332

238

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

120. Qaqish BF, Prisayanh P, Qian Y, Andraca E,
Li N, Aoki V, Hans-Filho G, dos Santos V,
Rivitti EA, Diaz LA (2009) Development of
an IgG4-based predictor of endemic pemphigus foliaceus (fogo selvagem). J Invest
Dermatol 129:110–118
121. Wills S, Cabanlit M, Bennett J, Ashwood P,
Amaral D, Van de Water J (2007)
Autoantibodies in autism spectrum disorders
(ASD). Ann N Y Acad Sci 1107:79–91
122. Todd
RD,
Ciaranello
RD
(1985)
Demonstration of inter- and intraspecies differences in serotonin binding sites by antibodies from an autistic child. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 82:612–616
123. Connolly AM, Chez M, Streif EM, Keeling
RM, Golumbek PT, Kwon JM, Riviello JJ,
Robinson RG, Neuman RJ, Deuel RM (2006)
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and autoantibodies to neural antigens in sera of children
with autistic spectrum disorders, LandauKleffner syndrome, and epilepsy. Biol
Psychiatry 59:354–363
124. Singh VK, Warren RP, Odell JD, Warren WL,
Cole P (1993) Antibodies to myelin basic
protein in children with autistic behavior.
Brain Behav Immun 7:97–103
125. Singh VK, Warren R, Averett R, Ghaziuddin
M (1997) Circulating autoantibodies to neuronal and glial filament proteins in autism.
Pediatr Neurol 17:88–90
126. Libbey JE, Coon HH, Kirkman NJ, Sweeten
TL, Miller JN, Stevenson EK, Lainhart JE,
McMahon WM, Fujinami RS (2008) Are
there enhanced MBP autoantibodies in
autism? J Autism Dev Disord 38:324–332
127. Kirkman NJ, Libbey JE, Sweeten TL, Coon
HH, Miller JN, Stevenson EK, Lainhart JE,
McMahon WM, Fujinami RS (2008) How
relevant are GFAP autoantibodies in autism
and Tourette syndrome? J Autism Dev Disord
38:333–341
128. Morris CM, Zimmerman AW, Singer HS
(2009) Childhood serum anti-fetal brain antibodies do not predict autism. Pediatr Neurol
41:288–290
129. Goines P, Haapanen L, Boyce R, Duncanson
P, Braunschweig D, Delwiche L, Hansen R,
Hertz-Picciotto I, Ashwood P, Van de Water
J (2011) Autoantibodies to cerebellum in
children with autism associate with behavior.
Brain Behav Immun 25(3):514–523
130. Wills S, Rossi CC, Bennett J, Cerdeno VM,
Ashwood P, Amaral DG, Van de Water J
(2011) Further characterization of autoantibodies to GABAergic neurons in the central
nervous system produced by a subset of children with autism. Mol Autism 2:5

131. Torrente F, Anthony A, Heuschkel RB,
Thomson MA, Ashwood P, Murch SH (2004)
Focal-enhanced gastritis in regressive autism
with features distinct from Crohn’s and
Helicobacter pylori gastritis. Am J Gastroenterol
99:598–605
132. Torrente F, Ashwood P, Day R, Machado N,
Furlano RI, Anthony A, Davies SE, Wakefield
AJ, Thomson MA, Walker-Smith JA, Murch
SH (2002) Small intestinal enteropathy with
epithelial IgG and complement deposition in
children with regressive autism. Mol Psychiatry
7(375–382):334
133. Furlano RI, Anthony A, Day R, Brown A,
McGarvey L, Thomson MA, Davies SE,
Berelowitz M, Forbes A, Wakefield AJ,
Walker-Smith JA, Murch SH (2001) Colonic
CD8 and gamma delta T-cell infiltration with
epithelial damage in children with autism.
J Pediatr 138:366–372
134. de Magistris L, Familiari V, Pascotto A,
Sapone A, Frolli A, Iardino P, Carteni M, De
Rosa M, Francavilla R, Riegler G, Militerni R,
Bravaccio C (2010) Alterations of the intestinal barrier in patients with autism spectrum
disorders and in their first-degree relatives.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 51:418–424
135. D’Eufemia P, Celli M, Finocchiaro R, Pacifico
L, Viozzi L, Zaccagnini M, Cardi E, Giardini
O (1996) Abnormal intestinal permeability in
children with autism. Acta Paediatr
85:1076–1079
136. Wang LW, Tancredi DJ, Thomas DW (2011)
The prevalence of gastrointestinal problems
in children across the United States with
autism spectrum disorders from families with
multiple affected members. J Dev Behav
Pediatr 32:351–360
137. Buie T, Campbell DB, Fuchs GJ III, Furuta
GT, Levy J, Vandewater J, Whitaker AH,
Atkins D, Bauman ML, Beaudet AL, Carr
EG, Gershon MD, Hyman SL, Jirapinyo P,
Jyonouchi H, Kooros K, Kushak R, Levitt P,
Levy SE, Lewis JD, Murray KF, Natowicz
MR, Sabra A, Wershil BK, Weston SC, Zeltzer
L, Winter H (2010) Evaluation, diagnosis,
and treatment of gastrointestinal disorders in
individuals with ASDs: a consensus report.
Pediatrics 125(suppl 1):S1–S18
138. Adams JB, Johansen LJ, Powell LD, Quig D,
Rubin RA (2011) Gastrointestinal flora and
gastrointestinal status in children with autism–
comparisons to typical children and correlation with autism severity. BMC Gastroenterol
11:22
139. Genuis SJ, Bouchard TP (2010) Celiac disease presenting as autism. J Child Neurol
25(1):114–119

12

Autism Spectrum Disorders: From Immunity to Behavior

140. Constantino JN, Todd RD (2000) Genetic
structure of reciprocal social behavior. Am J
Psychiatry 157:2043–2045
141. Ronald A, Happe F, Bolton P, Butcher LM,
Price TS, Wheelwright S, Baron-Cohen S,
Plomin R (2006) Genetic heterogeneity
between the three components of the autism
spectrum: a twin study. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 45:691–699
142. Kolevzon A, Smith CJ, Schmeidler J,
Buxbaum JD, Silverman JM (2004) Familial
symptom domains in monozygotic siblings
with autism. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr
Genet 129B:76–81
143. Kates WR, Burnette CP, Eliez S, Strunge LA,
Kaplan D, Landa R, Reiss AL, Pearlson GD
(2004) Neuroanatomic variation in monozygotic twin pairs discordant for the narrow
phenotype for autism. Am J Psychiatry
161:539–546
144. Jorde LB, Hasstedt SJ, Ritvo ER, MasonBrothers A, Freeman BJ, Pingree C, McMahon
WM, Petersen B, Jenson WR, Mo A (1991)
Complex segregation analysis of autism. Am J
Hum Genet 49:932–938
145. Stubbs EG, Magenis RE (1980) HLA and
autism. J Autism Dev Disord 10:15–19
146. Daniels WW, Warren RP, Odell JD, Maciulis
A, Burger RA, Warren WL, Torres AR (1995)
Increased frequency of the extended or ancestral haplotype B44-SC30-DR4 in autism.
Neuropsychobiology 32:120–123
147. Lee LC, Zachary AA, Leffell MS, Newschaffer
CJ, Matteson KJ, Tyler JD, Zimmerman AW
(2006) HLA-DR4 in families with autism.
Pediatr Neurol 35:303–307
148. Torres AR, Maciulis A, Stubbs EG, Cutler A,
Odell D (2002) The transmission disequilibrium test suggests that HLA-DR4 and DR13
are linked to autism spectrum disorder. Hum
Immunol 63:311–316
149. Warren RP, Singh VK, Cole P, Odell JD,
Pingree CB, Warren WL, DeWitt CW,
McCullough M (1992) Possible association
of the extended MHC haplotype B44SC30-DR4 with autism. Immunogenetics
36:203–207
150. Fernando MM, Stevens CR, Walsh EC, De
Jager PL, Goyette P, Plenge RM, Vyse TJ,
Rioux JD (2008) Defining the role of the
MHC in autoimmunity: a review and pooled
analysis. PLoS Genet 4:e1000024
151. Guerini FR, Bolognesi E, Manca S, Sotgiu S,
Zanzottera M, Agliardi C, Usai S, Clerici M
(2009) Family-based transmission analysis of
HLA genetic markers in Sardinian children
with autistic spectrum disorders. Hum
Immunol 70:184–190

239

152. Guerini FR, Bolognesi E, Chiappedi M, De
Silvestri A, Ghezzo A, Zanette M, Rusconi B,
Manca S, Sotgiu S, Agliardi C, Clerici M
(2011) HLA polymorphisms in Italian children with autism spectrum disorders: results
of a family based linkage study. J Neuroimmunol
230:135–142
153. Mascart-Lemone F, Hauptmann G, Goetz J,
Duchateau J, Delespesse G, Vray B, Dab I
(1983) Genetic deficiency of C4 presenting
with recurrent infections and a SLE-like disease. Genetic and immunologic studies. Am
J Med 75:295–304
154. Odell D, Maciulis A, Cutler A, Warren L,
McMahon WM, Coon H, Stubbs G, Henley
K, Torres A (2005) Confirmation of the association of the C4B null allele in autism. Hum
Immunol 66:140–145
155. Warren RP, Burger RA, Odell D, Torres AR,
Warren WL (1994) Decreased plasma concentrations of the C4B complement protein
in autism. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
148:180–183
156. Warren RP, Yonk J, Burger RW, Odell D,
Warren WL (1995) DR-positive T cells in
autism: association with decreased plasma levels of the complement C4B protein.
Neuropsychobiology 31:53–57
157. Mostafa GA, Shehab AA (2010) The link of
C4B null allele to autism and to a family history of autoimmunity in Egyptian autistic
children. J Neuroimmunol 223:115–119
158. Corbett BA, Kantor AB, Schulman H,
Walker WL, Lit L, Ashwood P, Rocke DM,
Sharp FR (2007) A proteomic study of
serum from children with autism showing
differential expression of apolipoproteins
and complement proteins. Mol Psychiatry 12:
292–306
159. Grigorenko EL, Han SS, Yrigollen CM, Leng
L, Mizue Y, Anderson GM, Mulder EJ, de
Bildt A, Minderaa RB, Volkmar FR, Chang
JT, Bucala R (2008) Macrophage migration
inhibitory factor and autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 122:e438–e445
160. Correll PH, Morrison AC, Lutz MA (2004)
Receptor tyrosine kinases and the regulation
of macrophage activation. J Leukoc Biol
75:731–737
161. Campbell DB, Sutcliffe JS, Ebert PJ, Militerni
R, Bravaccio C, Trillo S, Elia M, Schneider C,
Melmed R, Sacco R, Persico AM, Levitt P
(2006) A genetic variant that disrupts MET
transcription is associated with autism. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:16834–16839
162. Lintas C, Sacco R, Garbett K, Mirnics K,
Militerni R, Bravaccio C, Curatolo P, Manzi
B, Schneider C, Melmed R, Elia M, Pascucci

240

M. Careaga and P. Ashwood

T, Puglisi-Allegra S, Reichelt KL, Persico AM
(2009) Involvement of the PRKCB1 gene in
autistic disorder: significant genetic association and reduced neocortical gene expression.
Mol Psychiatry 14:705–718
163. Serajee FJ, Zhong H, Mahbubul Huq AH
(2006) Association of Reelin gene polymorphisms with autism. Genomics 87:75–83
164. Zhang H, Liu X, Zhang C, Mundo E,
Macciardi F, Grayson DR, Guidotti AR,
Holden JJ (2002) Reelin gene alleles and susceptibility to autism spectrum disorders. Mol
Psychiatry 7:1012–1017
165. Skaar DA, Shao Y, Haines JL, Stenger JE,
Jaworski J, Martin ER, DeLong GR, Moore
JH, McCauley JL, Sutcliffe JS, Ashley-Koch
AE, Cuccaro ML, Folstein SE, Gilbert JR,
Pericak-Vance MA (2005) Analysis of the

RELN gene as a genetic risk factor for autism.
Mol Psychiatry 10:563–571
166. Herman GE, Butter E, Enrile B, Pastore M,
Prior TW, Sommer A (2007) Increasing
knowledge of PTEN germline mutations: two
additional patients with autism and macrocephaly. Am J Med Genet A 143:589–593
167. Splawski I, Timothy KW, Priori SG,
Napolitano C, Bloise R (1993) Timothy syndrome. In: Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR,
Stephens K (eds) GeneReviews. University of
Washington, Seattle, WA
168. Nagarajan RP, Patzel KA, Martin M, Yasui
DH, Swanberg SE, Hertz-Picciotto I, Hansen
RL, Van de Water J, Pessah IN, Jiang R,
Robinson WP, LaSalle JM (2008) MECP2
promoter methylation and X chromosome
inactivation in autism. Autism Res 1:169–178

Part III
Technologies and Models
in Psychoneuroimmunology Studies

Chapter 13
Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology:
An Overview of How to Measure Sickness, Depressive/
Anxietal, Cognitive, and Physical Activity Behaviors
Jason M. York, Neil A. Blevins, Tracy Baynard,
and Gregory G. Freund
Abstract
The field of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) aims to uncover the processes and consequences of nervous,
immune, and endocrine system relationships. Behavior is a consequence of such interactions and manifests
from a complex interweave of factors including immune-to-neural and neural-to-immune communication.
Often the signaling molecules involved during a particular episode of neuroimmune activation are not
known but behavioral response provides evidence that bioactives such as neurotransmitters and cytokines
are perturbed. Immunobehavioral phenotyping is a first-line approach when examining the neuroimmune
system and its reaction to immune stimulation or suppression. Behavioral response is significantly more
sensitive than direct measurement of a single specific bioactive and can quickly and efficiently rule in or out
relevance of a particular immune challenge or therapeutic to neuroimmunity. Classically, immunobehavioral
research was focused on sickness symptoms related to bacterial infection but neuroimmune activation is
now a recognized complication of diseases and disorders ranging from cancer to diabesity. Immunobehaviors
include lethargy, loss of appetite, and disinterest in social activity and the surrounding environment. In
addition, neuroimmune activation can precipitate feelings of depression and anxiety while negatively
impacting cognitive function and physical activity. Provided is a detailed overview of behavioral tests
frequently used to examine neuroimmune activation in mice with a special emphasis on preexperimental
conditions that can confound or prevent successful immunobehavioral experimentation.
Key words: Mouse, Maze, Exploration, Brain based, Biobehaviors, Memory, Motor activity,
Anhedonia

1. Introduction
Since its inception as an interdisciplinary field of science in the
1970s, behavior has been an integral part of psychoneuroimmunology (PNI). Indeed, PNI is generally defined as the study of
the interactions between behavior, neural, immune, and endocrine

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_13, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

243

244

J.M. York et al.

system functions (1, 2). Behavior can be, and is largely, used to
assess whether a particular stimuli or experimental treatment has
the potential to activate the neuroimmune system (1, 2). An important concept to recognize in PNI is the bidirectionality that exists
between the nervous system and the immune system (2). This is to
say that both neural-to-immune and immune-to-neural signaling
can and do occur. Shared pathways exist between the nervous and
immune systems that use a repertoire of signaling molecules such
as cytokines and neurotransmitters (3) that are capable of interacting with both immune and nervous system cells. These bioactives
can convey the state of peripheral immunity to the neuroimmune
system, communicate the status of neuroimmunity to the peripheral immune system (3–5), and provide immunoactivating and
deactivating signals to immune cells throughout the body (6).
Observation of innate immune-mediated behavioral change
(immunobehaviors) is largely used as a method of measuring neuroimmune activation in response to pathogenic insult of infectious
(6) or noninfectious (7) etiology. Sickness behavior, in a classical
sense, is a set of coordinated behavioral changes in response to
immune stimulation aimed at conserving and redirecting body
energy stores toward combating illness and promoting recovery
(4, 8). Immunobehaviors are best known for their manifestation in
association with bacterial infection (8), but materialize in spectrum
of conditions and diseases including cancer (8), autoimmune
disorders (9), wounding (10), depression (11), and obesity (12).
In any circumstance in which the innate immune system is activated, peripheral inflammatory mediators can impact the brain,
altering normal function and causing symptoms of illness/loss of
well-being (4, 8). Typical sickness behavior symptoms include
reduction in food intake, lethargy, malaise, loss of interest in social
and/or environmental surroundings, changes in sleep patterns,
and impaired cognition (4, 8, 11). Furthermore, continued or dysregulated activation of the neuroimmune system can progress
beyond acute sickness symptoms and transition to behaviors
observed in the anxious or depressed (11). Fatigue is often a lingering complication of neuroimmune activation (6) and can present as purely mental or physical or (most commonly) in a
combinational form (13). In rodents, exercise behaviors like spontaneous wheel running (SWR) (14) are helping to unravel the
complex biology of physical fatigue while tests examining memory
formation (learning) and memory recall are being used to explore
mental fatigue (15).
Finally, immunobehaviors are a powerful indicator of neuroimmune status offering insight into the pro-inflammatory milieu of
the brain. Altered behavior manifests prior to detectable changes in
brain-based bioactives and lingers past their resolution. Such
conditions indicate that the brain is very sensitive to small perturbations and that traditional chemical bioassays are often not sensitive

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

245

enough or appropriately targeted to detect brain-based dysfunction
at the molecular level. Hence, use of behavioral testing provides
highly sensitive and phenomenologically relevant information in
regard to brain function but lacks significant specificity from a
mechanistic standpoint. This is either due to an evolution-derived
paucity of immunobehavioral phenotypes or a current knowledge/
technical deficiency in the ability to parse such behaviors into a
multitude of biologically relevant subsets. In this review, methods
for measuring sickness, depressive/anxietal, cognitive and physical
activity behaviors in mice are described. The tests were chosen
based on common usage and validated outcomes.

2. Preexperimental
Considerations
Behavior is a valuable tool for gauging the presence, severity, and
duration of innate immune activation. Prior to behavioral experimentation, preparatory procedures are required so that meaningful
and repeatable results can be obtained. Mice, like most animals
used for laboratory research, are responsive to the environment.
Consistency and reproducibility of results as in any field of science
is dependent on the decisions made and precautions taken before
initiation of testing. While the following does not account for every
possible preexperimental housing and husbandry scenario, it does
seek to articulate and define significant areas of preexperimental
bias. Every animal facility, like every laboratory, is unique with differences obvious and subtle. Standardizing and controlling for clear
confounds related to mouse strain, gender, and scientific model;
maintaining housing and husbandry practices that support animal
behavioral well-being and physical health are key. In addition, the
following is not intended to be an absolute guide for “correct”
mouse immunobehavioral experimentation, for it is critical that the
investigator identify, develop, and hone best practice related to the
particular area of study with a firm eye on federal laboratory animal
regulations and local institutional rules and guidelines.
2.1. Model and
Strain Choice

A first consideration should be the animal model and strain chosen.
The vast majority of PNI behavioral testing utilizes rats and mice.
Porcine models have been used (16), as have other types of rodents,
especially prairie voles (17). Mice are especially useful in neuroimmune
and immunobehavioral research due to their ability to reproduce and
mature rapidly and the relative ease to which genetic modification
can be applied through mutational, transgenic, and knockout
approaches (18). Different behavioral phenotypes exist between
strains. Therefore, it is important to be aware of and control for
potential inter-strain and inter-substrain variances (18), as well as
intra-strain variation between mice raised/housed by disparate

246

J.M. York et al.

commercial venders and institutional facilities. Furthermore,
genetically altered/modified mice are especially prone to immunobehavioral alteration and should be selected with such in mind.
With genetically altered/modified mice, diligent baseline testing in
comparison to wild-type animals is essential to ensure the behavior
noted is causative (i.e., due to knockout of a specific target gene)
and not a result of an unexpected consequence (e.g., saccharin
preference anomalies in leptin unresponsive mice (db/db and ob/
ob) related to the importance of leptin to sweet taste and not due
to a type 2 diabetes phenotype (19)).
2.2. Gender

Depending on strain, genetic alteration/modification, and behavioral test, male and female mice will perform differently. For example, in the elevated plus maze (EPM) females exhibit less general
activity (20). When female mice are compared to male mice in a
freely explorable open field arena, female mice are less active, are
less willing to leave their home cage to enter the open field, and are
less likely to explore the open field (21). Female mice generally run
for shorter distances in a voluntary wheel running paradigm than
male mice (22) and will run different distances depending on their
current state in the estrous cycle (23). Thus, regardless of identical
housing and husbandry practices, care must be taken in mixing
genders during behavioral testing. Such care can be especially frustrating when using genetically altered/modified animals due to inhouse breeding deficiencies and difficulty in acquiring adequate
numbers of similarly aged animals from commercial suppliers.

2.3. Age

Natural aging effects decreases in immune functioning with individual variation in severity depending on factors such as lifelong
physiological stressor exposure (24). It comes with little surprise
then that neuroimmune-based behavior can also be affected by
age. While sickness behavior appears beneficial to young mice, it
may be maladaptive in older mice (25). Age can also negatively
impact physical activity where aged mice run less (26). Young mice
present difficulty in running analyses as well due to progressive
increases in distance traveled (27). Investigators should be aware of
potential differences arising from non-age-matched experimental
mice and older mice reared under disparate conditions.

2.4. Transportation

Environmental factors play a significant role in how mice behave
and respond to neuroimmune stimuli and immunobehavioral
treatments. Mice should be allowed a transition phase to acclimatize to a new environment. Whether this is the procedure experimentation room itself (28, 29), or the housing room following
arrival from a commercial supplier or other outside source (28,
30). Biochemically, transportation stress increases plasma corticosterone levels in mice regardless of transport duration, and up
to 48 h of acclimation is required for corticosterone to return to

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

247

pretransportation values (29). Behavioral change in response to
transport has been shown to persist for 4 days (29), and body
weight reduction returns to pretransport levels within 4 days (28,
30). Therefore, a period of 5 days of acclimatization is generally
required as a minimum for mice undergoing behavioral testing
following off-site transportation (30). A minimum of 24 h of
acclimatization time following on-site transportation (i.e., between
housing and experimental rooms) should also be utilized (30).
These are minimum time recommendations for acclimatization.
Longer times may be necessary depending on the type of mice
used, the duration of transport, and the breadth of difference
between initial and relocated environmental conditions (28, 30).
As with any laboratory test, validation studies are recommended
to confirm preexperimental choice decisions.
2.5. Light Cycle

Alteration of light cycle has been shown to affect natural murine
behavioral patterns (30), as well as neuroimmune behavior (e.g.,
anxiety) (31). Mice are under control of a genetically driven circadian clock that serves to regulate physiological and behavioral processes in a diurnal fashion (32). Therefore, it is important to ensure
that experimental rooms have a similar light cycle to the housing
room. In addition, it is advisable to initiate behavioral experiments
at the same time of “day” especially when performing repeat testing. Mice are active at night, and, for the majority of testing, should
be tested during the dark cycle. Reverse light cycle housing is
beneficial so as not to put undue burden on personnel performing
the behavioral tests. Mice also are crepuscular (33), with heightened activity during the early (dusk) and late (dawn) components
of the light cycle dark phase and should be tested during these peak
activity times. Methods for determining the timing of these active
periods are described in Subheading 3.2.

2.6. Temperature/
Humidity

Temperature should be largely similar across animal housing facilities, as it is federally regulated by the Office of Laboratory Animal
Welfare (OLAW) in the United States (34). According to the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, mice should
be housed in a room/environment with temperatures ranging
from 68 to 79 °F (20–26 °C) (34). Mice show neuroimmune and
behavioral sensitivity to both heat- (35) and cold-stress (36) indicating the potential for altered behaviors with temperature
fluctuations. Relative humidity should also be maintained at similar
levels across animal housing facilities, and the Guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals indicates a range of 30–70%. Cage
style, construction, bedding, and enrichment materials as well as
housing density affect temperature and humidity within the cage
microenvironment (34). It is therefore important to recognize that
room temperature and humidity may not necessarily reflect intracage temperature and humidity, depending on housing factors.

248

J.M. York et al.

2.7. Noise

Noise also has the potential to activate neuroimmune signaling
pathways and alter behavior, as bell ringing (37) and noise produced by vacuuming (38) have been shown to stress laboratory
mice as evidenced by activation of the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal (HPA) axis (39, 40). White noise generators that create a
constant background have been shown to reduce behavioral
response to sudden loud noise (41).

2.8. Odors

Mice use odors for communication, marking territory, and in individual and group recognition signaling (30). In addition to using
patterns of urine deposition for communication, mice also produce
specialized odors via several glandular secretions (30). There is also
evidence that neuroimmune activation can alter odor production
and that odors can induce behavioral change. When mice are administered the classical neuroimmune activator lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
they generate olfactory cues to indicate that they may have a transmissible pathogen causing healthy cage mates to socially withdraw
from the sick mouse (42). This phenomenon is also seen in healthy
mice housed with tumor-bearing cage mates (43). Finally, exposure
to foreign/strange odors (e.g., human associated odors) can result
in stress responses (30). Unfortunately, no specific research has been
performed examining the duration of olfactory stress responses in
mice, nor is there an identified acclimation or exhaustion time for
evocative scents. It should also go without mention that eliminating
as many olfactory cues within rooms, cages, and on experimental
apparatuses (e.g., through use of 70% v/v ethanol) is best practice.
Mouse handler odors (i.e., perfumes and predator scents (e.g.,
feline)) should be minimized and/or eliminated.

2.9. Handling

Physical handling of mice is a well-studied modifier of mouse physiology and behavior (44). Therefore, it is advisable to handle mice
at least daily so as to acclimate them to their human researchers
and to physical contact. With this, mice will be more likely to
appropriately and consistently respond to experimental treatment
and have a reduced opportunity to succumb to handling stress
which can elevate blood corticosterone (45). The handling method
used, however, appears important. Mice respond to handling more
readily when removed from their cage passively, such as with a tube
or cupped hands, as opposed to the more traditional removal by
grasping the base of the tail with the thumb and forefinger or soft
forceps (46). Hurst and West noted that mice develop a consistent
response (measured as voluntary interaction with handlers) by the
ninth day of single 60 s handling sessions, regardless whether the
mice were picked up by grasping the tail base or allowed to enter a
tube or cupped hands before handling (46). Of note, mice picked
up by the base of the tail had a lower level of voluntary interaction,
compared to tube and cupping methods (46). Furthermore, when
investigators acclimated mice by removing mice from their cages

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

249

with tubes or cupped hands, the mice were not aversive to scruff
restraint, whereas those removed via tail base grasping showed
increased distress when scruffed (46). As such, a period of at least
9–10 days of daily handling appears sufficient to ensure a consistent and nonaversive response in mice. If injections are a necessary
component of a behavioral experiment, a passive method of mouse
cage removal appears best.
2.10. Housing Method/
Environmental
Enrichment

Mice are social animals and should be housed as often as possible
with other mice (34). Several studies have investigated the impact
that individual housing/social isolation has on neuroimmunity and
immunobehaviors, and social isolation induces aggression in male
mice (47). Individually housed male mice also appear more prone
to developing anxiety- and depressive-like behaviors following
exposure to unpredictable chronic mild stress (48) despite their
increased propensity to explore (21, 29). Group housed mice order
themselves into a social hierarchy, with 1–2 dominant mice and
several subordinate mice. Subordinates as well as dominant mice
show similar exploratory levels in an open field context (21) but
this seems dependent on the relatedness of the group-housed mice,
for an introduced nonsibling dominant intruder mouse evokes
social stress and immune cell glucocorticoid resistance in the
group-housed mice (49). Therefore, housing mice in groups at a
density of one 25–30 g mouse per 77.4–96.7 cm2 of cage floor area
by 12.7 cm of cage ceiling height appears advantageous (34).
Interestingly, a clean cage environment (30, 50) and novel
cage construction materials can reduce mouse welfare and induce
aberrant behaviors (30, 34). Introduction to a clean/novel cage
has been shown to increase plasma corticosterone in mice and to
increase physical activity within the first 24 h of exposure. Metal
cages, as opposed to more commonly used plastic cages (34), are
colder to the touch, more conducive to noise generation, and less
permeable to light (30, 34). Additionally, the use of solid flooring
with absorbent bedding is recommended by most institutional care
and use committees, as well as federal regulatory bodies, because
wire mesh flooring can lead to paw injury (34) that can confound
behavioral experiments involving the innate immune system (6).
Environmental enrichment is thought to enhance mouse wellbeing by providing motor and sensory stimulation. Environmental
enrichment may include nesting material, structures, and/or
shelters within the cage (34). Lack of environmental enrichment
dampens mouse reactivity and alertness in many behavioral tests
(51). Environmental enrichment is, however, somewhat strain
dependent because the loss of reactivity and alertness noted earlier
was observed in BALB/c mice but not seen in C57BL/6 mice. In
fact, Van de Weerd et al. concluded that male BALB/c mice housed
in enriched environments were anxious (51). Olsson and Dahlborn
noted simply changing the barren cage environment by placing

250

J.M. York et al.

objects within it does not necessarily lead to “enrichment” (52).
Instead, it is important to observe what, how, and when behavioral
and physiological changes occur in the animal, and if these changes
result in long-term improved health and well-being of the animal.
Some “environmental enrichers” are felt to result in increased
stress and anxiety (51, 52). Thus, the environment within the cage
may be as important as the environment in which the cage is housed
in when establishing appropriate preexperimental procedures.

3. Sickness
Behaviors
Sickness behavior is classically defined as the nonspecific set of
symptoms associated with the body’s response to innate immune
challenge (6). Symptoms of sickness behavior include anorexia,
fatigue, malaise, reduced locomotor activity, loss of interest in
environmental and social surroundings, and disappearance of
body-care activity (6, 53). These changes occur in response to
brain-based increases in the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), resulting in
changes in the motivational state of an organism (6, 11). Sick individuals also experience psychological symptoms such as anxiety
and depression, and cognitive deficits such as learning and memory
loss (discussed in later sections). Frequently used methods for
quantifying sickness behavior include social exploratory activity
(54), locomotor activity (4, 55), food disappearance (4, 55), and
rotarod testing (56, 57).
3.1. Social Exploration
of a Novel Juvenile

The paradigm of social exploration appears to have evolved from
work done by Thor and Holloway showing that adult laboratory
rats actively investigate and form social memories of conspecifics
(58), principally via ano-genital sniffing, nosing, mutual grooming,
and close following (59). Rodents also do not show behavioral
habituation during social investigation provided the conspecific
juvenile is novel at each presentation into the home cage of the
adult (60). Furthermore, adult male rats do not exhibit aggression
towards prepubertal male juveniles but do toward unrelated postpubertal males, which is a function of androgen-related odors from
the postpubertal rat eliciting aggressive attacks from the adult due
to infamiliarity (58). It is this basis in social recognition that first
allowed Dantzer et al. to show that social memory could be modulated by neurohypophyseal peptides (54). This is likely the first
experiment that used social exploration as a tool to measure the
effects of neuroactive compounds. Social exploratory behavior was
adapted from social memory testing by using a different juvenile at
each observation time point (61), and due to the advantage of the
lack of habituation when using a novel juvenile, social exploration

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

251

has been routinely used as a sensitive test of immunobehavioral
perturbation. Bluthé et al. adapted the rat-based Dantzer procedure
to mice, and since the test has remained largely unchanged (59).
3.1.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Mice should be housed individually at least 24 h prior
to the initial measurement and be allowed to acclimatize to the
procedure room (if procedure room differs from housing room)
for the time period in which they are individually housed. In some
studies, infrared light is used with the aid of infrared- or nightvisioncapable cameras (59, 61), but use of red-tinted lighting is also
acceptable, as mice only have limited ability to detect light from
the red portion of the visible spectra (34). All observations of
adult–juvenile interaction are video recorded during social exploration testing for later analysis. Within each observation/recording
session, each adult mouse to be experimentally observed (subject
mouse) is only exposed to a juvenile (challenge mouse) once. Social
exploration is initially measured immediately prior to any experimental treatments so as to serve as a baseline of social exploratory
activity for each subject mouse. Social exploration is subsequently
measured at specific times following experimental treatment, usually every 2 h for the first 12 h posttreatment, and then every 12
thereafter until recovery is reached (59, 61). A test session/observation time point consists of introducing a novel challenge mouse
(conspecific juvenile mouse of the same sex) into the home cage of
the subject mouse for 5 min before returning the juvenile to its
own home cage (59, 61, 62). In some instances, the juvenile challenge mouse is housed in a clean 7.62 cm × 7.62 cm × 7.62 cm wire
mesh enclosure (baby cage) when introduced into the home cage
of the subject mouse (63) to avoid undesired aggressiveness seen
with certain mouse strains like C57BL/6 mice. If a baby cage is
used, it is best to acclimate subject mice to the wire mesh enclosure
by including it in their home cage during single housing. Once the
experiment is completed, the duration (in s) of exploration or
investigation of the challenge mouse by the subject mouse is
recorded from analysis of the video record (59, 61, 63). Preferably,
analysis of the video record should utilize automated video tracking software (64) such as that developed by Noldus Information
Technology (Leesburg, VA). In general, tracking software eliminates observer bias and provides more consistent results. When
using tracking software, care must be given as to mouse color vs.
background color so that the animal is easily distinguished. If tracking software is not available, a trained observer blinded to the
treatment groups (blinded trained observer) can manually quantify
social exploration without significant prejudice (59, 61). Observer
training for all video review behavior testing is best accomplished
by having personnel new to scoring a behavioral test evaluate
previously analyzed videos that have been scored and validated

252

J.M. York et al.

(proficiency testing). When the scoring skills of the trainee observer
are within plus/minus 10% of a novel validated video in three consecutive evaluations of novel validated videos, the observer trainee
is deemed proficient. This same training should be followed when
educating personnel to the use of automated tracking software.
During manual video review the blinded trained observer uses a
stopwatch to record the time of interaction initiated by the subject
mouse with the challenge mouse throughout the 5 min designated
investigational period. Social exploration is considered to be subject mouse-to-challenge mouse investigation (not the opposite),
including ano-genital sniffing, nosing, following, and grooming.
With use of a baby cage, nose-to-cage contact is considered exploration. Social exploration is typically shown in graphical display
using either raw seconds of exploration at each time point (59) or
as percent control or percent baseline (63).
3.2. Locomotor Activity

As lethargy is a core symptom of sickness behavior, locomotion
(53) can be used as a technically easy and high-throughput measure of sickness behavior. Spontaneous locomotor activity is advantageous in that it can be assessed without moving mice from their
home cage, and automated video tracking software can be easily
used for analysis. In addition, wide screen video capture allows for
up to eight mice to be observed at once. Alternatively, specifically
designed activity chambers (Versamax from AccuScan Instruments,
Columbus, OH) with built-in infrared beam detection systems can
be used (65) allowing for real-time analysis. Such testing platforms,
however, introduce an element of novel environment and need to
be thoroughly cleaned between each mouse tested.

3.2.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Mice should be housed individually at least 24 h prior to
the initial measurement and be allowed to acclimatize to the
procedure room (if procedure room differs from the housing
room) for the time period in which they are individually housed.
As with social exploration, infrared or red lights can be used to
provide illumination. At each time point of interest, mouse movement is recorded for 5 min (12), with a camera placed over the
center of a single cage or grouping of cages. If multiple mice are
being recorded during a given observation point, they should be
shielded from one another’s view. Movement including total distance traveled, velocity, and time spent moving is best determined
from the video record using automated tracking software. However,
if tracking software is not available videos can be hand scored by a
blinded trained observer. To score manually, a thin-line grid
comprised of six equally sized rectangles is affixed to the television
or monitor screen directly over the cage and the blinded trained
observer counts the number of times the mouse crosses a line (line
crossing) throughout the 5 min designated investigational period.

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

253

A mouse is only considered to have line crossed if both fore- and
hind limbs cross a line (62).
A more powerful method for assessing mouse locomotor activity is through long duration (hours–days) tracking. This is required
when detailing mouse crepuscular movement. While video recording can be used for such evaluation, the data collection, storage, and
interpretation can be burdensome-to-prohibitive due to video file
sizes. Therefore, the use of biotelemetry is the preferred method
for this type of testing (66). With this method, a biotelemetric
emitter is surgically implanted within the peritoneum of a mouse
and a receiver pad linked to a PC running data collection software is
placed directly underneath the home cage of the implanted mouse
(Mini Mitter, Bend, OR). Mouse movement is tracked and recorded
automatically. Specific procedures and training for this method
should be provided by the manufacture of the device chosen.
3.3. Food Consumption

Food consumption, (or disappearance, as discussed below), is an
indicator of sickness, as individuals experiencing illness often exhibit
anorexia. Food consumption gives an indication of whether
anorexia is present, which could further be used to indicate if sickness behavior is occurring (4, 55). Food consumption can be measured in at least two different ways, as outlined below. The first
uses “food disappearance,” which is often interpreted/estimated as
food consumption.

3.3.1. Food Disappearance
Procedure

Mice should be individually housed as per social exploration at
least 24 h prior to experimentation. With single housing, food
should be moved from the overhead cage food hopper and placed
in an 8 cm diameter × 5 cm stainless steel bowl in the cage. Steel is
preferred over ceramic because ceramic containers can absorb water
if they are not completely glazed. In addition, steel dishes can be
magnetically secured to the cage bottom or side with the use of a
strong magnet. This prevents mice from tipping the bowl and spilling food which can easily occur with plastic bowls. After the acclimation period, and just prior to initiation of testing, new food
should be added to the steel bowl and the bowl weighed. This
process should occur at the very beginning of the dark/active cycle
of the mice in order not to disturb mice during their sleep cycle.
Food disappearance is measured by weighing the bowl plus food
at fixed intervals, such as every 24 h. For longer term experiments,
food can be re-added to the bowl and reweighed (55). The term food
disappearance is used in place of food consumption because not
all food is ingested. Some food inadvertently falls in the cage
bedding (67).

3.3.2. Food Consumption
Procedure

Mice should be individually housed as per social exploration at
least 24 h prior to experimentation. 24 h prior to testing mice
should be fasted but allowed full access to water. An empty 8 cm

254

J.M. York et al.

diameter × 5 cm stainless steel food bowl should be present in the
cage. One hour prior to testing, mice should be removed to
similarly sized cage without bedding but with full water access.
Testing is initiated by wiping the bottom of the bedding-less cage
clean and placing a preweighed bowl with food in the cage. After
1 h the food bowl is removed and weighed as are any food remnants within the cage. The difference between food bowl food disappearance and food collected from the cage floor is considered
food consumed (65).
A more powerful method for assessing food disappearance
and/or consumption is through use of automated food and water
intake measurement systems where food and/or water intake initiated by the animal is evaluated by computer controlled electronics
(BioDAQ, New Brunswick, NJ). Specific procedures and training
for this method should be provided by the manufacture of the
device chosen.
3.4. Rotarod Testing

Inducers of neuroimmune activation and sickness behavior impair
motor coordination and induce physical fatigue (56). The rotarod
performance test can measure motor coordination (57) by assessing how well mice avoid falling of a rotating rod (68). Some strains
of mice progressively perform better on the rotorod test during
repeated trials at the same rotational speed indicating a physical
training or memory component to this procedure (69, 70). Rotarod
apparatuses are available via commercial vendors such as AccuScan
Instruments (Columbus OH), with some variance in features
(number of lanes and/or rod diameter, for example). In general,
rotarod apparatuses have the same basic design featuring a 3–9 cm
diameter rod (57, 69) partitioned by plastic divider discs spaced
evenly longitudinally along the rod. The end point measured is
latency to fall from the rod (71). Fall detection ranges from pressuresensitive pads located under the rod to infrared beams that automatically stop an integrated timer when hit or blocked, respectively.
Rotarod performance can, however, be assessed manually from a
video record (71) by a blinded trained observer or by automated
tracking software.

3.4.1. Procedure

Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like with social
exploration, mice require at least 24 h of acclimation to the procedure room. Use of preexperimentation acclimation to the rotarod
is not agreed upon. Some have exposed (trained) mice to the rotating rod, by placing mice on the rod at a low speed (4 rpm (56) and
18 rpm (57)), while others have not (69). Preexperimentation
exposure to the rod has been done 1 week in advance of testing
(57) and immediately prior to testing (56). Finally, the test itself
can be performed in 1 of 2 ways. The rotarod performance test
measures the duration of time a mouse can remain on the rotating
rod at a single or several fixed speeds (71). The accelerating rotarod

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

255

performance test measures the maximum speed of rotation the
mouse can tolerate before it falls from the rod in a fixed amount of
time (69, 71). All pretest conditioning and testing should be made
during the dark/active cycle of the mice (56), although testing has
been performed during the light/inactive cycle as well (57).
3.4.2. Rotarod
Performance Test

Rotarods should be calibrated such they rotate at a constant speed,
and should be kept clean and as odor free as possible between trials, as urine and feces on the rod can affect performance (71).
Testing is initiated by placing mice on the rotating rotarod which
rotates at a fixed speed. Mice are allowed to maintain themselves
on the rod as long as they can and the test session continues until
they fall or a designated time point is achieved such as 1–5 min on
the rod. At such time the latency to fall is recorded. Fixed speed
trials are best used after significant validation testing on the strain
of mouse chosen and are best used on mice with significant loss of
coordination because small losses of coordination may not manifest at the speed or time chosen. Some testing protocols investigate
several different speeds increasing with each trial. An example of
increasing speeds used is 5, 8, 15, 20, 24, 31, 33, and 44 rpm (71).
Mouse rest time between increasing speed trials ranges from 10 to
60 min (69, 71).

3.4.3. Accelerating Rotarod
Performance Test

Preconditions are similar as for nonaccelerating rotarod testing. This
test differs in that the rod accelerates at a constant rate through some
specified range of speed (4–40 rpm) over a fixed amount of time
(5 min). Mice remain on the rod for as long as they can and speed of
the rod at the time of falling is the recorded end point (69).
For both methods of rotarod testing, motor learning can be
assessed by performing daily repeated trials to determine if mouse
time spent on the rod (fixed rod speed) or rod speed endured
(accelerating rod speed) improves from trial to trial (69).

4. Depressive/
Anxiety-Like
Behaviors

Depression and anxiety are well-known consequences of neuroimmune activation (11, 65, 72). However, the difficulty in assessing
and distinguishing depressive/anxiety-like responses to conditions
or experimental treatments lies in the fact that sickness behavior
symptoms can overlap with depressive/anxiety-like behaviors.
Sickness-induced reduced locomotion is a key confound in that
most tests designed to measure depressive/anxiety-like behaviors
require mouse movement (11). For this reason, behavioral testing
for depressive/anxiety-like behaviors following exogenous activation of the neuroimmune system should be performed only after
overt physical symptoms of sickness have subsided and spontaneous

256

J.M. York et al.

locomotion has returned to pretreatment levels. Importantly, the
presence of depressive/anxiety-like behaviors should be confirmed
using antidepressive and/or anxiolytic therapies to improve/
resolve the identified depressed or anxious behavior (11). Tests for
depressive/anxiety-like behaviors include burrowing (12, 73), the
EPM (74), the open field test (OFT) (75, 76), the zero maze test
(69), the tail suspension test (TST) (11), sucrose/saccharin preference test (11), and the forced swim (aka Porsolt) test (11). The
forced swim test (FST) is the test best validated for depression due
to its responsiveness to antidepressives (77). However, investigators should refrain from using any one single test to definitively
measure depressive/anxiety-like behaviors. Such behaviors are best
examined using a battery of tests. Unfortunately, there is no ideal
combination of tests because confounds are mouse strain/model/
gender and experimental treatment specific. As an example,
sucrose/saccharin preference testing should not be used in mouse
testing where serum leptin is affected due to the impact of leptin
levels on sweet taste detection by the mouse tongue (19).
4.1. Burrowing

Rodents are well known burrowers (73). This behavior is related to
tunnel maintenance and possibly defense. Defensive burying is a
known indicator of anxiety and can, itself, be measured (73).
Burrowing appears to be largely hippocampal driven but mouse
strain differences exist with C57BL/6 mice burrowing more than
129S2/Sv mice (73). Burrowing is associated with depressive/
anxiety-like behavior where reduced burrowing reflects an increased
depressive/anxiety-like state (12). As burrowing utilizes relatively
simple equipment and minimal labor, it is a simple and inexpensive
method for evaluating immunobehaviors (12, 73).

4.1.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Mice should be individually housed as per social exploration at least 24 h prior to experimentation and, with single housing, a clean empty burrowing tube should be placed in the cage.
Burrowing tubes can be constructed from standard white 6.8 cm
diameter PVC piping cut to 20 cm in length (73). The open end
of the burrowing tube is elevated 3 cm by bolting two 50 mm
machine screws 1 cm from the open end, and spaced so that the
tube entrance is elevated. This elevation keeps burrowing substrate
from spilling out of the open end. The closed end is sealed with a
standard PVC end cap (12). Testing should begin 3 h prior to the
onset of the dark/active phase of the light cycle and is initiated
with addition of burrowing substrate to the tube (12). The burrowing substrate used needs to be suitable to the mouse strain and
experimental treatment. Pelleted mouse chow, gravel, or sand are
common materials used for burrowing (73). The burrowing tube
can be completely filled (73) or filled with a fixed amount of substrate (12) if ceiling effects are not a concern. Ceiling effects arise

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

257

with vigorous borrowers. These mice will remove all substrate from
a tube in a rapid time frame obscuring any difference in burrowing
activity relative to time. After substrate is placed in the burrow, the
burrow plus substrate is weighed and returned to the cage. If
mouse chow is used as a substrate, food from the cage food hopper
should be removed for the duration of the burrowing test (73).
Depending on anticipated mouse burrowing activity, experimental
observation time points can range from 1 to 24 h. Amount burrowed (in grams) is calculated from the pre- and postburrowing
weight of the tube plus substrate. Following a measurement, the
burrowing tube can be refilled, reweighed, and returned to the
cage for additional testing (73). Alternatively, a single measurement of burrowing can be utilized (12). Occasionally, with poorly
burrowing mice, one or several training sessions may be necessary,
and a practice run with the mice to be used in the experiment can,
and has been shown to, improve burrowing activity and reduce
variability between animals (73).
4.2. Elevated Plus
Maze

The EPM is a simple method to measure anxiety-like behavior in
mice. Anxiety is assessed by comparing the time spent in the open
(exposed) vs. closed (walled) arms of a 4-arm radial maze (74).
The advantage to the EPM is that it eschews use of noxious stimuli
like foot shock, food/water deprivation, and/or loud noise.
Instead, it relies on the predilection of mice to favor dark enclosed
spaces over open and obviously elevated environments (74).
Accommodation and/or learning can occur with repeated exposures to the maze. Therefore, EPM is generally administered as a
single exposure with control mice for comparison (74).

4.2.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like
with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to
the procedure room. The maze can be made of a variety of materials but those that can be easily wiped clean between each mouse
tested like stainless steel or plastic are recommended. Maze shape
is that of a plus sign where the four arms are spaced 90° apart,
radiating from an open central 5 cm × 5 cm platform. Arm length
and width are 25 cm × 5 cm, respectively. Maze elevation should be
at least 40 cm from the floor (74, 79). Arm wall height is 15 cm in
the “closed” arms and there are no side walls in the “open” arms.
The central 5 cm × 5 cm platform has no walls. The open arms
are at 180° from each other, likewise with the closed arms. Unlike
the tests described earlier, EPM should be well lit by overhead
white light. Significant arm wall-generated shadows, especially
those confined to a single arm, should be avoided. Testing is initiated
by placing the mouse in the open central 5 cm × 5 cm platform.
Each subject mouse needs to be introduced to the maze in a similar
fashion and placed on the maze in the same spot with analogous

258

J.M. York et al.

orientation (74). Mouse exploration is video recorded for 5 min
(74) to 10 min (78). Time spent in open and closed arms, the
number of entries between arms (defined as all four paws of the
mouse crossing the threshold of an arm), frequency of head-dips
(downward movement of the mouse head toward the floor from
an open arm), rears and stretch-attend postures (74) are best determined from the video record using automated tracking software
(62). If tracking software is not available videos can be hand scored
by a blinded trained observer (74).
4.3. Open Field Test

The OFT can be used to measure movement (76) and anxiety-like
behavior (75, 76). OFT apparatuses are walled arenas that vary in
shape (square, rectangle, circle) and size (250–2,500 cm2) (76).
OFT testing should not be used as a surrogate test for spontaneous
locomotor activity because the OFT uses a novel environment
(76). Anxiety-like behavior in the OFT is evaluated by examining
mouse movement throughout the arena with a special focus on the
amount of time the mouse spends/moves next to walls of the OFT
apparatus (thigmotaxis). The novelty, size, and white light illumination of the OFT contribute to anxiogenesis (76). Procedures
vary considerably but the open field arena is usually brightly lit in
studies investigating anxiety (75).

4.3.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like
with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to
the procedure room. For testing of anxiety-like behaviors the arena
should be larger than 1,600 cm2 (76). Arena wall height should be
at least 35 cm so as to limit the ability of the mouse to see over/
above the arena. The arena can be made of a variety of materials
but those that can be easily wiped clean between each mouse tested,
like stainless steel or plastic, are recommended. Testing is initiated
by placing the mouse in the center of the arena, and each subject
mouse needs to be introduced to the arena in a similar fashion and
placed in the same spot with analogous orientation. Movement
through the arena is video recorded for 5–10 min and analysis of
movement is best documented with automated tracking software
because thigmotaxis is easily appreciated with this method. Path
tracing is a key aid in that overall patterns of movement can be
evaluated. Such patterns supplement the usual measurements of
time spent adjacent to the arena walls, wall preferences, time spent
not adjacent to the arena walls, overall distance traveled, velocity
and time spent moving. Videos can be manually examined using a
line-crossing scoring approach (similar to that described for spontaneous locomotor activity) but this method should be carefully
validated due to the complex grid pattern needed to ascertain time
spent close to the arena walls. Due to this intricacy, some have used
the end point of total distance moved plus time spent in the central

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

259

25% of the arena (79). Finally, OFT has been used as a repeated
measure to determine if therapeutics improve performance over
time (80).
4.4. Zero Maze

Like the EPM, the zero maze measures anxiety-like behaviors in
mice (69) by using elevation and open and closed areas. Therefore,
time spent in the open indicates a reduced level of fear/anxiety as
demonstrated by use of anxiolytic agents and their ability to increase
time spent in the open area of the zero maze (69). The advantage
of the zero maze over the EPM is the elimination of the central
platform of EPMs, which can complicate analysis of open/closed
arm comparisons (81).

4.4.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like
with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to
the procedure room. Maze design varies but in general is comprised of a circular track 30–45 cm in diameter that is 3–5 cm wide.
Maze elevation should be at least 40 cm from the floor (69, 82).
The track should be divided into four quadrants with two quadrants having no side walls and two quadrants having side walls at
least 15 cm in height. These open and closed areas should alternate. As with all maze constructions, materials that are easily wiped
clean between each mouse tested are recommended (69, 81, 82).
Ample but dim (40–60 lux) white lighting should be used to
achieve similar illumination of both the open and closed quadrants
(81). Testing is initiated by introducing the subject mouse to the
middle of a closed quadrant (designated as the starting quadrant).
Each subject mouse needs to be introduced to the maze in a similar
fashion and placed on the maze in the same place and orientation.
Mouse exploration is video recorded for 5 min (81). Time spent in
open and walled arms, the number of transitions between open
and walled quadrants, number of rears, number of head-dips (the
actual dipping of the head over the edge of the track in an open
quadrant), time spent grooming, the number of stretch attend
postures, and number of fecal boli in each type of quadrant are best
determined by using a combination of automated tracking software and direct observation after testing (fecal boli) (69, 81). If
tracking software is not available videos can be hand scored by a
blinded trained observer. Entry into a quadrant occurs when all
four paws cross the threshold of an open or walled area (81).

4.5. Tail Suspension
Test

The TST is a commonly used behavioral test for assessing depressive-like behavior in mice. It is thought to induce an escape response
(83). With increased depressive-like behavior the mouse fails to
extricate itself from the apparatus and becomes immobile. Increased
immobility indicates a greater degree of depressive symptoms (84).
Importantly, antidepressants shorten immobility offering a degree

260

J.M. York et al.

of validation to the test’s usefulness in measuring depressive-like
behaviors (83). The TST can be automated through use of commercially available apparatuses that utilize computer-linked linear
load cells and load cell filters to determine mouse movement/
struggle (Med Associates, St. Albans, VT). As with any commercially purchased device, specific procedures and training should be
provided by the manufacture of the device chosen. However, certain basic procedures should be followed and considered with use
of the TST including the difficulty in examining young (especially
C57BL/6) mice due to their robust tail climbing behavior and
penchant for extracting themselves from the device.
4.5.1. Procedure

Unlike all the previous behavioral tests described the TST should
be administered during the light/inactive cycle of the mice. Single
housing prior to testing is not required but, like with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to the procedure
room. Testing is initiated by affixing the mouse to the apparatus
“hook” with adhesive tape wrapped around the tail at three quarters of its length from base. Hook the mouse to the apparatus
through the tape as close to the tail as possible. The tail should
remain straight so as not to injure the mouse. Mice should be suspended as uniformly as possible, and if multimouse devices are
used the mice should be shielded from each other’s view (84).
Immobility verse movement/struggle should be measured for
6 min. Nonautomated devices can be constructed, which are essentially chambers with hooks. Mouse behavior can be video recorded
and immobility determined from the video record by automated
tracking software (85) or a blinded trained observer (86). With any
of the aforementioned analysis techniques, time of immobility is
compared between control and experimental groups of mice (84).

4.6. Forced Swim Test

The FST, also called the Porsolt test for the investigator who developed the test in rodents, like the TST, is a tool for assessing depressive-like behavior in mice. The FST is relatively easy to administer
(87) and felt to be the best validated test for depression by the
pharmaceutical industry (88). This test evolved from the observation that rats will develop an immobile posture after an initial
attempt to escape from an inescapable cylinder filled with water.
FST-induced immobility is thought to represent behavioral despair
(failure of persistent escape behavior) or a development of passive
behavior that causes the animal to stop actively coping with a stressor (87). The FST has several disadvantages when compared to the
TST. The FST appears to be more stressful for mice and carries a
risk of hypothermia (84). Mice of varying fatness are also difficult
to assess due to inherent buoyancy differences.

4.6.1. Procedure

Like the TST, the FST should be administered during the light/
inactive cycle of the mice (88). Single housing prior to testing is
not required but, like with social exploration, mice need at least

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

261

24 h of acclimation to the procedure room. As with most device
requiring tests, equipment design varies. A simple setup is to use
clean white or black cylindrical PVC containers 16 cm in diameter
and 31 cm in height (essentially 2 gallon open head pails) containing 20 cm of water maintained at 25 ± 1 °C (89). The FST should
be performed under 30 lux white light (90). Testing is initiated by
introducing the subject mouse to the water-filled container. Mouse
swimming is video recorded for 6 min (89). Immobility is determined from the video record from the last 5 min of the FST using
either automated tracking software (91) or a blinded trained
observer (89). Immobility scoring should not include movements
necessary for the mouse to maintain its head above water (84).
Like the TST, time of immobility is compared between control and
experimental groups of mice.
4.7. Sucrose/
Saccharin Preference

Anhedonia, or the inability to gain pleasure from otherwise enjoyable experiences, is one of the features of depression (92, 93). In
mice, their preference for sweetened solutions has been exploited
to measure anhedonia. The decreased consumption of a sweettasting solution is indicative of anhedonic behavior and can be
reversed with antidepressives (93). Sucrose (93) and saccharin (12)
solutions are commonly used opposite normal tap water in a
2-choice test. For investigators concerned with mouse caloric
intake, saccharin is the recommended sweetener (12). Advantages
to the sucrose/saccharin preference test are that it can be run continuously for many days without significant concern of adaptation
or learning.

4.7.1. Procedure

Three days prior to testing mice should be singly housed in standard cages adapted for 2-bottle water access (adaptation phase). If
the experimental design requires mice to be challenged with a neuroimmune activator, each bottle should contain either saccharin as
a 0.4% sodium saccharin solution (1% for sucrose can substituted
for saccharin) or water. If the experimental design does not require
exogenous challenge as with a comparison of mice of different
strains or genders, the adaptation phase should consist of both
bottles being filled with water. The adaption phase is especially
important to experiments using endogenous immune activators so
as not to elicit the behavior of conditioned aversion where the
mouse associates a newly introduced substance like saccharin/
sucrose with the cause of their loss of well-being (94). After the
adaptation phase, mice are usually administered a challenge at the
beginning of their dark/active cycle and then returned to the cage
in which they were adapted in the presence of both water and saccharin (testing phase). Fluid consumption is recorded every 24 h.
Fluid consumption is determined by bottle weight (12). In order
to control for the development of bottle bias, bottle position of
water vs. sweetened solution should be switched on a regular but
defined basis such as halfway through the experiment or every 24 h.

262

J.M. York et al.

Bottle switching should also be practiced during the adaptation
phase usually at 24 h intervals. Sweetened solution preference is
generally reported as a percentage of sweetened solution consumption/disappearance to total fluid consumption/disappearance (93). A 50/50 consumption of sweetened solution to water
equates to anhedonia but a ratio in which water consumption/
disappearance exceeds sweetened solution consumption/disappearance is indicative of aversion and should trigger concerns as to
the applicability of the results to the measurement of depressivelike behaviors (12).

5. Cognitive
Behaviors
Neuroimmune activation can dramatically impact cognitive function (9) causing learning and memory deficits. Most mouse-based
behavioral tests for cognitive function make use of memory and
focus either on the ability of the mouse to form new memories
(memory formation) or recall old memories (memory retention).
Memories involving location (spatial memory) are especially utilized (9). A cornucopia of cognitive function tests exist. Some of
these tests have been specifically designed to identify specialized
aspects of learning and memory such as olfactory memory (95).
Given that peripheral innate immune driven neuroimmune activation is relatively brain-region nonspecific, cognitive tests that cover
more global aspects of brain function are favored by PNI
investigators.
5.1. Novel Object
Recognition

Novel object recognition is a test of working memory in mice. The
test exploits the innate tendency of mice to investigate a new entity
(96). Novel object testing is one of the simplest of cognition tests,
but test variations are described that add significant complexity
through mixing of objects, object placement (novel location testing), and testing arena conditions (12, 96–98). The setup for novel
object recognition typically depends on what sort of memory function a researcher desires to investigate (96). An advantage of novel
object testing over other seemingly more powerful maze-based
memory tests is its adaptability to repeated measure testing (96).
In essence, as long as the mouse is well adapted to the familiar
object, changing out the novel object after each exposure allows
for a new round of testing. This feature is very useful when looking
at recovery from a neuroimmune challenge.

5.1.1. Memory Recall
Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Mice should be housed individually at least 24 h prior to
the initial measurement. The 24 h training phase is initiated by
introducing two identical objects into the home cage (standard

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

263

shoe-box cage size; 28 cm in length; 17 cm in width; 12.5 cm in
height) of the singly housed mouse. The objects are placed 10 cm
apart at the short-side wall end, 5 cm from the short side wall and
3.5 cm from the long-side wall. Tall (3–5 cm in height) complex
objects are preferred because when a tall complex object is introduced during the testing phase it provokes significantly more
exploration time. Tall complex objects can be constructed from
Lego® blocks (Enfield, CT). Magnets can be used to secure the
structures to the cage floor. All structures should be taken apart
and cleaned prior to reuse. After the 24 h training phase, the mouse
is subjected to the chosen neuroimmune activator. At relevant
times after the applied immunobehavioral challenge, the memory
recall testing phase is initiated by placing the mouse in a homecage like arena (including bedding) which contains a similar object
setup as in the training phase where one of the familiar objects has
been replaced by a novel tall complex object. The mouse should be
introduced at the cage end opposite the objects. No spatial clues
should be present in the testing/training area. Object exploratory
behavior is video recorded for 5 min and object investigation is
determined from the video record by either automated tracking
software or by a blinded trained observer. Object exploration is
considered as contact by mouth, nose, or paw. Accidental contact
such as bumping into an object while passing should not be considered (97). Mice with a memory recall deficit should examine
both the familiar and novel objects equally (99). Once recovered
from neuroimmune activation, mice should explore the novel
object over the familiar object. This test cannot be performed as a
repeated measure and, thus, requires separate groups of mice to
determine at what time after neuroimmune activation cognitive
recovery occurs.
5.1.2. Memory Formation
Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like
with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to
the procedure room. Memory formation testing differs from recall
testing in that training occurs after endogenous activation of the
neuroimmune system instead of before (96). The procedure is
identical to the above except at relevant times after the applied
immunobehavioral challenge mice are trained for 1 h with the two
familiar objects in the shoebox-sized testing arena then returned to
the home cage. After 1 h in the home cage, testing is initiated by
placing the mouse back in the testing arena where one of the familiar objects has been replaced by a novel object. Recording time and
scoring are identical to the above. Mice with a formation deficit
should examine both the familiar and novel objects equally. Once
recovered from neuroimmune activation, mice should explore the
novel object over the familiar object. This test can be performed as
a repeated measure as long as the novel object is always new.

264

J.M. York et al.

5.2. Fear Conditioned
Learning

Fear conditioned learning is a form of classical (Pavlovian)
conditioning where an association between a stimuli and its aversive consequence(s) is made (100). Fear conditioning is a highly
conserved behavior that occurs in mice both in the laboratory and
in the wild. In PNI research, it is a useful tool for evaluating emotional memory formation and recall (100). Fear conditioned learning
is generally a one-trial learning procedure and is unique from other
cognitive tests in that the investigator regulates the parameters of
the stimulus. Factors that impact mouse hearing, like age, are important to consider prior to use of fear conditioned learning, as auditory sensory decline will negatively affect sound-based contextual
cues (100). Like novel object testing, fear conditioned learning can
be used to test memory formation and memory recall. For memory
formation testing, the training phase (see below) is conducted after
neuroimmune stimulation. For memory recall testing, the training
phase is conducted prior to neuroimmune stimulation.

5.2.1. Cued Fear
Conditioning Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Mice should be single housed for this behavioral procedure and, like with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of
acclimation to the procedure room. Automated commercially
available fear conditioning apparatuses (San Diego Instruments,
San Diego, CA) are the easiest way to adapt this testing paradigm.
General apparatus parameters are fairly uniform. There is a shock
generator and scrambler that delivers a 0.1–1.0 mA foot shock
through a wire grid floor in concert with a sound generator that
produces auditory cues, all contained in a shoebox cage-sized
chamber (100). It is recommended that sound meters and voltmeters are used to verify and record stimulus intensities (100). Prior
to testing mice require training. In the initial training session, mice
are placed in the fear conditioning apparatus for 120 s (phase A)
before the presentation of a 30 s sound cue (phase B). A 2 s foot
shock is delivered immediately after the sound cue (phase C). Mice
are returned to their home cages 30 s after the shock ends. Repeat
training can be utilized to reinforce the memory. As noted earlier,
training relative to neuroimmune stimulation determines whether
memory formation or recall is being tested. Testing is usually initiated 24 h posttraining and consists of re-introducing the mouse to
the fear conditioning apparatus and representing the sound cue.
The sound cue now lasts for 180 s. Mouse behavior during this
180 s period is recorded with a side-mounted video camera.
However, apparatuses with a beam detection grid system linked to
a PC can automate analysis. With video recording, freezing and
nonfreezing behavior is scored by a blinded trained observer at
10 s intervals. Freezing is considered a complete lack of mouse
movement (100). Fear conditioning is presented as number of
freezing episodes. With an automated detection system, actual
time spent frozen can be determined.

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

265

5.2.2. Contextual Fear
Conditioned Procedure

Contextual fear conditioning uses the same preexperimental and
scoring procedures as for cued fear conditioning. However, in contextual fear conditioning, no sound cues are delivered. The mouse
is expected to associate the apparatus with the foot shock. Testing
time is 180 s. Complexity can be added by using an alterable
microenvironment within the fear conditioning apparatus (altered
contextual fear conditioning). A variety of cues from visual to olfactory can then be utilized (100).

5.3. Spontaneous
Alternation

Spontaneous alternation is the simplest spatial memory test to perform in mice. Increases and decreases in spontaneous or perfect
alternations reflect improvements and impairments, respectively, in
spatial memory function (12, 101). Spontaneous alternation can
be performed in a variety of maze types including radial arm, T and
Y (12, 102). Subforms of spontaneous alternation testing have also
been described including forced-trial alternation, where one arm
of the maze is closed off, forcing the mouse to enter the open arm
without choice. In a subsequent testing, the closed arm is then
made available (102). Interestingly, certain mouse strains have
been shown to be biased in their turning direction (102), and this
should be considered and controlled for. Like novel object testing,
spontaneous alternation can be used to test memory formation
and memory recall. For memory formation testing, spontaneous
alternation test is conducted after neuroimmune stimulation. For
memory recall testing, the mouse is tested in the Y-maze (which
serves as a training period), exposed to a neuroimmune activator
and then re-tested in the Y-maze. In addition, spontaneous alternation can be performed as a repeated measure and maze performance usually increases with repetition. Repeated measure testing
is generally preferred because a “one and done” testing strategy is
more indicative of locomotor activity and less dependent on spatial
memory (102).

5.3.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of the
mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like with
social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to the
procedure room. As with all mazes described previously, the Y-maze
used for spontaneous alternation should be made of a material that
can be easily wiped clean between each mouse tested. Clear Plexiglas
is preferred so that a different black-colored design (lines, circles, or
triangles) can be affixed to the outside wall of each arm to provide
intra-maze visual cues. The maze base is an opaque blue. Maze
shape is three equally spaced arms 120° from each other (radial Y).
Arm length is 40 cm, arm width is 9 cm, and arm wall height is
16 cm (12). Testing is initiated by placing the mouse into the distal
end of a randomly chosen arm (as assigned by a random number
generator). Each subject mouse needs to be introduced to the maze
in a similar fashion and placed on the maze with analogous orientation.

266

J.M. York et al.

Mouse exploration is recorded for 5 min (3 and 15 min have also
been used (103)). If the experimental design allows, mice should
be tested every 24 h for 4 consecutive days. Perfect alternations are
determined from the video record by a blinded trained observer.
A perfect alternation is defined as exploration of two different arms
of the maze sequentially before a return to the starting arm (e.g.,
beginning in arm “C,” moving to arm “A,” then to arm “B,” before
returning to arm “C” again) (12). Number of “regular” alternations should also be scored. Regular alternations are defined as
entering all three arms within a sequence of four arm entries (e.g.,
ACAB is considered an alternation, whereas ACAC is not) (102).
Arm entries occur when all four paws of the mouse pass the threshold of the arm entrance (12). Results are represented as total alternations or perfect alternations divided into the total possible
alternations or perfect alternations, respectively (102). Perfect alternation scoring is considered more rigorous.
5.4. Barnes Maze

The Barnes maze, like spontaneous alternation, is a test of spatial
memory. This test combines several aspects of the previously mentioned mazes including elevation, open/exposed illuminated space,
and a dark enclosed area (104). Use of the Barnes maze was popularized as an alternative to the Morris water maze (MWM) (described
in the next section) because swimming may produce anxiety (105).
Removal of water also allows for more balanced testing of mice of
different fat density due to elimination of the buoyancy effect.
Importantly, the Barnes maze appears to rely on the same hippocampal-dependent memory function as the MWM (104). As with
any maze designed to test spatial memory, extra- and intra-maze
cues serve as location reference points and without these cues mice
perform less well (104). Like spontaneous alternation, the Barnes
maze can be used to test memory formation and recall depending
on when neuroimmune activation is triggered relative to the training period. However, recall is significantly simpler to measure when
using transient memory impairment paradigms.

5.4.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like
with social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to
the procedure room. As with all mazes, construction materials
should be easily cleanable. A typical Barnes maze is a 90 cm diameter white acrylic disc with 12 equally spaced through-and-through
holes arranged 5 cm from the outer edge of the disc. Hole diameter is 5 cm and the maze is situated 56 cm off the floor (104).
A tunnel-like extension attached to an enclosed sealable 8 × 8 × 8 cm
chamber (escape chamber) needs to be freely fittable to one of the
holes from underneath the maze. Thus, for the mouse to escape
the maze, it must enter a hole. Extra maze cues, such as different
geometric shapes are placed around the maze and on the walls of

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

267

the room (105). Prior to testing multiday training is required.
Training occurs four times per day (during the dark/active cycle of
the mouse) for a 5-day period. In each session, the mouse is introduced to the maze (lit at 1,200 lux) via a nontransparent holding
chamber placed in the center of the maze. Time spent in the holding chamber is 30 s. After the holding chamber is unsealed, the
mouse is allowed to explore the maze freely for 5 min. During each
training session, the escape chamber should remain under the same
assigned escape hole with all other holes blocked. During the 5 min
exploration period, the mouse should find the escape chamber
hole. If the mouse fails to find the escape chamber hole, it is picked
up and placed near the entrance of the escape chamber hole and
allowed to enter. Once the mouse enters the escape chamber the
mouse is removed from the maze and the training session is ended
(104). One hour after the final training session a probe trial is conducted in which all of the holes are blocked (preventing any escape)
and the mouse is allowed to explore the maze for 5 min. Successfully
trained mice with functional spatial memory should actively search
for the remembered escape chamber hole in the appropriate location. Mouse introduction to the maze during the probe trail uses
the holding chamber technique as performed during training. After
immunobehavioral stimulation, testing is initiated re-performing a
single 5 min training procedure. Mouse behavior is video recorded
and maze performance evaluated from the video record using a
combination of automated tracking software and observation. The
mouse should use the extra-maze visual cues to locate the remembered escape chamber (104). Scoring the trials consists of tallying
the frequency of errors committed before entering the escape
chamber (examination of the incorrect hole), timing the latency to
find/enter the escape chamber, and determining the path length
to the escape chamber. Different variations of the Barnes maze
exist and include a hidden-target fixed-location modification in
which the extra-maze cues were always in the same location, but
the maze was rotated (104).
5.5. Morris Water
Maze

The MWM is used for assessing spatial or place learning. Advantages
of the MWM include no requirement for pretraining, high reliability across different tank designs, and proved validity in measuring
hippocampal-dependent spatial and reference memory. Learning
impairments in the MWM are independent of locomotor deficits,
as locomotor reductions do not seem to affect swim speed (106).
The MWM is an open circular pool filled with water. Mice must
swim and search for a small, hidden platform just below the surface
of the water in a fixed location utilizing extra-maze cues. The maze
is constructed of a circular, stainless steel tank 122 cm in diameter,
with 51 cm high walls, with nonreflective inner surfaces. Contrasting
colors between the inside of the tank and the mouse allow easy
integration of automated tracking software for the analysis of swim

268

J.M. York et al.

path, duration, and location. As the purpose of the MWM test is to
induce the mouse to use distal cues, any seams or recognizable patterns on the inside of the pool are not recommended. The platform
(made of a plastic or PVC conduit shaft with a plastic or acrylic
platform on top) is typically square or circular in shape and is clear
or matching in color to the inside of the swim tank. The platform
is positioned just below the water level (0.5–1 cm). Water temperature should range between 24 and 26 °C (107). The room in which
the MWM test takes place in should allow for ample distal visual
cues like for the Barnes maze. Studies have shown that lack of cues
can negatively affect MWM performance (106). The investigator
should be aware that their presence in the procedure room during
MWM testing may make them a distal visual cue. All variations of
the MWM procedure should take place in an illuminated, albeit
indirectly lit room (to avoid reflections or glare on the water surface, which can make scoring with automated tracking software
difficult) (106). The maze is divided into four, equally sized quadrants with the platform positioned in the center of one of these
quadrants (106). The procedures for spatial acquisition and reversal
learning are described below but a variety of modifications exist.
A key concern in MWM spatial memory testing is that the probe trial
should be spaced temporally from the last training session to effectively and reliably measure reference memory formation (106).
5.5.1. Spatial Acquisition
Procedure

All testing should take place during the dark/active cycle of the
mice. Single housing prior to testing is not required but, like with
social exploration, mice need at least 24 h of acclimation to the
procedure room. The mouse is placed (not dropped) at the selected
start position in the maze, facing the tank wall. A timer or video
tracking should be started immediately at the placement of the
mouse in the maze. The timer remains on until the mouse reaches
(comes in contact with) the platform. Standard trial limits of
1–2 min per trial are usually used, and mice that have not reached
the platform should be placed on or guided to it by the investigator (106). The animal should remain on the platform for 15 s. This
step helps mice orient their position in space relative to the extramaze cues (106). Following the inter-trial interval, the mouse is
again placed in the maze, this time in a different but predetermined location (most protocols start the mice from one of four
positions—south (the investigators position), north (opposite the
investigators position), east (to the right of the investigators position), and west (to the left of the investigators position)). Trials are
repeated four times per day for 5 days. Following training, the
experimental treatment is administered and time is allowed for the
treatment to take effect, or in the case of neuroimmune activators,
for sickness behavior to resolve so as not to confound the results
(11). The probe trial is run, during which the platform is removed
from the maze. The probe trial is video recorded and lasts 60 s,

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

269

after which the mouse is removed. The objective of the probe trial
is to determine whether or not the mouse can recall memories of
where the platform was during training sessions based on the distal
visual cues (106). End points measured in spatial acquisition
include the number of platform site crossovers, time and distance
swam in the target quadrant relative to the other quadrants, time
in a predefined radius around the original platform position (larger
than the original platform itself), average distance swam to target
site, and latency to first target site crossover. For investigators without automated tracking capabilities, blinded trained observers
should use a timer to calculate the time spent in the aforementioned areas, as distance traveled is not feasible to measure with
trained observers. Percent time spent in the target quadrant or percent of distance swam in the target quadrant is the most common
reported end points in MWM spatial acquisition testing (106).
5.5.2. Spatial Reversal
Testing Procedure

Spatial reversal testing determines the ability of the mouse to extinguish a particular memory in favor of forming a new one (106).
In this paradigm, training procedures are the same as they were for
spatial acquisition, but the probe trial differs. During the reversal
training probe trial, the platform is moved, typically to the opposite
side of the maze, but cues remain in their same position as during
training trials (107). Mice are placed first on the platform for 30 s
to allow them to gain some spatial cues as to where the new platform location is. Mice are then given 1–3 trials to reach the platform, starting from different locations if necessary (107). The same
end points are used in spatial reversal training as with spatial acquisition (106). Since the platform remains in the maze, latency to
reach the platform, swim speed, and total distance swam are also
used as end points (107). Some variations of the MWM include
repeated learning, latent learning, and cued learning (106).

6. Physical
Activities
An acute reduction in physical activity is a sign/symptom of sickness and is associated with fatigue (11). Chronic low-grade
inflammation is also linked to altered patterns of physical exertion
and fatigue (11). Physical activity and fatigability can be measured
with techniques adopted from exercise research and include voluntary running wheel and exhaustive/forced running. These tests are
more powerful than spontaneous and long duration locomotion
testing described earlier in that they can tease out more subtle
activity differences. Animals that engage in more spontaneous
physical activity generally have less fatigue, higher fitness levels,
and better performance in forced exercise testing (108). Important
behavioral differences appear to exist with spontaneous and forced

270

J.M. York et al.

exercise. Wheel running is spontaneous and thought to be under
central nervous system control. The concept of motivation is critical to this behavior and sickness-associated fatigue appears to be a
modulating factor (109, 110). In contrast, exhaustive exercise,
such as forced treadmill running (FTR), is generally controlled by
muscle and/or cardiovascular limitations (111). The rapidity with
which an animal discontinues an exhaustive exercise test may also
be governed by immunobehavioral fatigue (111). PNI investigators most often use SWR (26) and FTR (109) to probe the impact
of immunobehaviors on physical activity. SWR is preferred for the
high-throughput testing in that it can be remotely monitored with
little demand on personnel. FTR is much more labor intensive but
allows for considerable customization including alterability of
duration, frequency, and intensity. FTR is also considerably more
stressful to mice.
6.1. Spontaneous
Wheel Running

A key advantage of SWR is that it can be assessed without moving
mice from their home cage and the length of examination time can
be very long. A disadvantage is that mice need to be singly housed.
Specialized caging is needed to accommodate the running wheel
and bedding must be correctly adjusted and monitored so as not to
interfere with the wheel. A basic running wheel may measure only
revolutions of the wheel and may need manual resetting at each
data collection point. Advanced running wheel systems (Mini
Mitter, Bend, OR) can obtain hourly, daily, or weekly distances
run. Regardless of the running wheel sophistication, wheels need
to be clean and well lubricated. Running wheel size and structure
should also accommodate the size of mouse used. In long duration
studies, cage cleaning and contact with animal facility and/or
investigative personnel can result in an acute reductions in running.
For the below procedure, an automated, multichannel running wheel
system (Mini Mitter, Bend, OR) is utilized. Specific procedures
and training for any given wheel should be provided by the manufacture of the device chosen.

6.1.1. Procedure

Mice need to be individually housed for experiments with running
wheels and need to acclimate to the procedure room for at least
24 h prior to experimentation. Groups of mice in cages with locked
running wheels and in cages with no wheel present should be
included for proper experimental controls. Prior to experimentation (such as neuroimmune activation), a baseline measurement is
recorded in case post hoc normalization of distance run is required.
After immunobehavioral stimulation, mice are immediately
returned to their cage and allowed access to the wheel (rotating,
locked) or cage environment (no wheel). A 10-day course of wheel
running is recommended. With automated running wheel systems,
total distance run is reported. With manual wheels, wheel revolutions are recorded and distance traveled calculated by multiplying

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

271

the wheel circumference by the number of revolutions. A limitation
in SWR is the absence of a running intensity marker. However,
some sophisticated wheel systems can record revolutions/min providing some insight into intensity.
6.2. Forced Treadmill
Running

FTR better measures mouse fatigue (111). Like running wheel systems, mouse treadmills vary in sophistication with some allowing
both uphill and downhill running (IITC Inc. Life Science,
Woodland Hills, CA). Treadmills coupled to oxygen consumption
systems can be used to determine mouse “fitness.” Nonrodent
treadmills (Jog-A-Dog, Ottawa Lake, MI) divided into lanes with
Plexiglas dividers allow for high-throughput studies of up to 20
mice. Treadmills should contain a protective end (foam) to prevent
mice from being thrown from the device and to provide an impetus to move forward should the mouse reduce its speed or stop
running. Mice will respond to the contact of the tail/hind portion
with the protective end. A ventilated cover is also recommended.
Intra-experimental prodding can be used if a mouse or mice appear
to predominantly “ride” the treadmill but this encouragement can
lead to bias due to the difficulty of applying prodding evenly to
every subject mouse.

6.2.1. Procedure

All observations should be made during the dark/active cycle of
the mice. Mice do not need to be single housed prior to this procedure but should be allowed to acclimate for at least 24 h to the
procedure room. Prior to experimentation, mice should be trained
daily for 3 days at speeds of 14–20 m/min (speed depends on
mouse age and strain). Mice that cannot learn the treadmill task
should not be included in experimental studies. Training sessions
should last until mouse exhaustion (1–2 h). Immunobehavioral
stimulation is delivered 24 h after the final training session. Testing
is initiated by conducting a treadmill run to exhaustion. Exhaustion
is considered as a cease in running that is not motivated by protective end contact. Time to exhaustion is the measured end point.
Distance to exhaustion can be calculated from the time run and
velocity of the treadmill.

7. Conclusion
Behavioral testing is a fundamental element of PNI research and
mice provide a powerful tool for exploring the origins and relevance
of sickness symptoms. Like with any experimental procedure, uniform agreement on exact technique between scientists has not been
achieved. Therefore, the above should be considered an overview of
how to measure sickness, depressive/anxietal, cognitive, and physical activity behaviors. As important as appropriate procedures are

272

J.M. York et al.

to successful behavioral testing, preexperiment considerations are
likely the greatest determinate to relevance and reproducibility. It
is essential that mice be housed in environments devoid of negative
stressors and be well adapted to any change. Variation in the equipment and experimental design is usually irrelevant when compared
to unexpected and unpredictable housing conditions. In fact, wet
cages, noise, and unfamiliar odors are often used as elicitors of
adverse biobehaviors. Thus, consistency, concern, and care in handling mice afford the best foundation for success. Finally, keen
observation is an additional reward, and making sure to note unanticipated or unusual behaviors during testing may lead to innovative discoveries toward the creation of new behavioral tests and
immunobehavioral paradigms.

Support
This research was supported by the National Institutes of Health
(DK064862, NS058525 and AA019357 to G.G.F.), USDA
National Institute of Food and Agriculture, Hatch project #ILLU971-32.
References
1. Ader R (2000) On the development of psychoneuroimmunology. Eur J Pharmacol
405(1–3):167–176
2. Maier SF, Watkins LR, Fleshner M (1994)
Psychoneuroimmunology—the
interface
between behavior, brain and immunity. Am
Psychol 49(12):1004–1017
3. Kerschensteiner M, Meinl E, Hohlfeld R
(2009) Neuro-immune crosstalk in CNS diseases. Neuroscience 158:1122–1132
4. Kelley KW et al (2003) Cytokine-induced
sickness behavior. Brain Behav Immun 17:
S112–S118
5. Irwin MR (2008) Human psychoneuroimmunology: 20 years of discovery. Brain Behav
Immun 22:129–139
6. Dantzer R (2004) Cytokine-induced sickness
behavior: a neuroimmune response to activation of innate immunity. Eur J Pharmacol
500:399–411
7. Johnson DR et al (2007) Acute hypoxia activates the neuroimmune system, which diabetes exacerbates. J Neurosci 27(5):1161–1166
8. Dantzer R (2001) Cytokine-induced sickness
behavior: mechanisms and implications. Ann
N Y Acad Sci 933:222–234

9. Gibertini M (1998) Cytokines and cognitive
behavior.
Neuroimmunomodulation
5:
160–165
10. Wingfield JC et al (2006) Contexts and ethology of vertebrate aggression: implications for
the evolution of hormone-behavior interactions. In: Nelson RJ (ed) Biology of aggression. Oxford University Press, New York
11. Dantzer R et al (2008) From inflammation to
sickness and depression: when the immune
system subjugates the brain. Nat Rev Neurosci
9:46–56
12. Lavin DN et al (2011) Fasting induces an
anti-inflammatory effect on the neuroimmune
system which a high-fat diet prevents. Obesity
19(8):1586–1594
13. Paul RH et al (2000) Fatigue and its impact
on patients with Myasthenia Gravis. Muscle
Nerve 23(9):1402–1406
14. Carmichael MD et al (2006) Role of brain
IL-1β on fatigue after exercise-induced muscle damage. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol 291:R1344–R1348
15. Rönnbäck L, Hansson E (2004) On the
potential role of glutamate transport in mental fatigue. J Neuroinflammation 1:22

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

16. Warren EJ et al (1997) Coincidental changes
in behavior and plasma cortisol in unrestrained
pigs after intracerebroventricular injection of
tumor necrosis factor-α. Endocrinology
138(6):2365–2371
17. Grippo AJ (2009) Mechanisms underlying
altered mood and cardiovascular dysfunction:
the value of neurobiological and behavioral
research in animal models. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev 33(2):171–180
18. Crawley JN (2003) Behavioral phenotyping
of rodents. Comp Med 53(2):140–146
19. Shigemura N et al (2004) Leptin modulates
behavioral responses to sweet substances by
influencing peripheral taste structures.
Endocrinology 145(2):839–847
20. Rodgers RJ, Cole JC (1993) Influence of
social isolation, gender, strain and prior novelty on plus-maze behaviour in mice. Physiol
Behav 54(4):729–736
21. Palanza P, Gioiosa L, Parmigiani S (2001)
Social stress in mice: gender differences and
effects of estrous cycle and social dominance.
Physiol Behav 73:411–420
22. Lightfoot JT et al (2004) Genetic influence
on daily wheel running activity level. Physiol
Genomics 19:270–276
23. Basterfield L, Lumley LK, Mathers JC (2009)
Wheel running in female C57BL/6J mice:
impact of oestrus and dietary fat and effects
on sleep and body mass. Int J Obes 33:
212–218
24. Hawkley LC, Cacioppo JT (2004) Stress and
the aging immune system. Brain Behav
Immun 18(2):114–119
25. Dilger RN, Johnson RW (2008) Aging,
microglial cell priming, and the discordant
central inflammatory response to signals from
the peripheral immune system. J Leukoc Biol
84(4):932–939
26. Martin SA et al (2011) Voluntary-wheel exercise training attenuates the visceral adipose,
but not central, inflammatory response to
LPS in aged C57BL/6J mice. Brain Behav
Immun 25(S2), S217–S218 (Abstract)
27. Ma H et al (2010) Effects of diet-induced
obesity and voluntary wheel running on bone
properties in young male C57BL/6J mice.
Calcif Tissue Int 86:411–419
28. Obernier JA, Baldwin RL (2006) Establishing
an appropriate period of acclimatization following transportation of laboratory animals.
ILAR J 47(4):364–369
29. Tuli JS, Smith JA, Morton DB (1995) Stress
measurements in mice after transportation.
Lab Anim 29:132–138
30. Jennings M et al (1998) Refining rodent
husbandry: the mouse. Report of the Rodent

273

Refinement Working Party. Lab Anim 32(3):
233–259
31. Clénet F et al (2006) Light/dark cycle manipulation influences mice behavior in the elevated plus maze. Behav Brain Res 166(1):
140–149
32. Ciarleglio CM et al (2009) Population encoding by circadian clock neurons organizes circadian behavior. J Neurosci 29(6):1670–1676
33. Goulding EH et al (2008) A robust automated system elucidates mouse home cage
behavioral structure. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 105(52):20575–20582
34. National Research Council of the National
Academies (2011) Guide for the care and use
of laboratory animals. National Academy of
Sciences, Washington, DC
35. Buchanan JB et al (2008) Cognitive and
neuroinflammatory consequences of mild
repeated stress are exacerbated in aged mice.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 33(6):755–765
36. Ajarem JS, Safar E, Ahmad M (2011) Effect
of ethanol and thermal stresses on the social
behavior of male mice. Asian J Biol Sci 4:
362–368
37. Goshen I et al (2003) The role of endogenous
interleukin-1 in stress-induced adrenal activation and adrenalectomy-induced adrenocorticotropic
hormone
hypersecretion.
Endocrinology 144:4453–4458
38. Naff KA et al (2007) Noise produced by vacuuming exceeds the hearing thresholds of
C57BL/6 and CD1 mice. J Am Assoc Lab
Anim Sci 46(1):52–57
39. Turnbull AV, Rivier C (1995) Regulation of
the HPA axis by cytokines. Brain Behav
Immun 9(4):253–275
40. Beishuizen A, Thijs LG (2003) Review: endotoxin and the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis. Innate Immun 9(1):3–24
41. Pfaff J (1974) Noise as an environmental
problem in the animal house. Lab Anim
8:347–354
42. Arakawa H, Cruz S, Deak T (2011) From
models to mechanisms: odorant communication as a key determinant of social behavior in
rodents during illness-associated states.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35(9):1916–1928
43. Alves GJ et al (2010) Odor cues from tumorbearing mice induces neuroimmune changes.
Behav Brain Res 214:357–367
44. Conour LA, Murray KA, Brown MJ (2006)
Preparation of animals for research—issues to
consider for rodents and rabbits. ILAR J
47(4):283–293
45. Balcombe JP, Barnard ND, Sandusky C (2004)
Laboratory routines cause animal stress.
Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci 43(6):42–51

274

J.M. York et al.

46. Hurst JL, West RS (2010) Taming anxiety in
laboratory mice. Nat Methods 7(10):825–826
47. Koike H et al (2009) Behavioral abnormality
and pharmacologic response in social isolationreared mice. Behav Brain Res 202(1):114–121
48. Ma X et al (2011) Social isolation-induced
aggression potentiates anxiety and depressivelike behavior in male mice subjected to unpredictable chronic mild stress. PLoS One 6(6):
e20955
49. Avitsur R, Stark JL, Sheridan JF (2001) Social
stress induces glucocorticoid resistance in
subordinate animals. Horm Behav 39(4):
247–257
50. Pardon M et al (2004) Repeated sensory contact with aggressive mice rapidly leads to an
anticipatory increase in core body temperature and physical activity that precedes the
onset of aversive responding. Eur J Neurosci
20(4):1033–1050
51. Van De Weerd HA et al (1994) Strain specific
behavioural response to environmental enrichment in the mouse. J Exp Anim Sci 36:
117–127
52. Olsson AS, Dahlborn K (2001) Improving
housing conditions for laboratory mice: a
review of ‘environmental enrichment’. Lab
Anim 36:243–270
53. Kent S et al (1992) Sickness behavior as a new
target for drug development. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 13:24–28
54. Dantzer R et al (1987) Modulation of social
memory in male rats by neurohypophyseal
peptides. Psychopharmacology 91:363–368
55. Park SE et al (2011) Central administration of
insulin-like growth factor-I decreases depressive-like behavior and brain cytokine expression in mice. J Neuroinflammation 8:12
56. Krzyszton CP et al (2008) Exacerbated
fatigue and motor deficits in interleukin-10deficient mice after peripheral immune stimulation. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol 295(4):R1109–R1114
57. Pecaut MJ et al (2002) Behavioral consequences of radiation exposure to simulated
space radiation in the C57BL/6 mouse: open
field, rotarod, and acoustic startle. Cogn
Affect Behav Neurosci 2(4):329–340
58. Thor DH, Holloway WR (1982) Social memory of the male laboratory rat. J Comp Physiol
Psychol 96(6):1000–1006
59. Bluthé RM, Dantzer R, Kelley KW (1991)
Interleukin-1 mediates behavioural but not
metabolic effects of tumor necrosis factor α in
mice. Eur J Pharmacol 209:281–283
60. Bluthé RM, Schoenen J, Dantzer R (1990)
Androgen-dependent vasopressinergic neurons

are involved in social recognition in rats. Brain
Res 519:150–157
61. Dantzer R, Bluthé RM, Kelley KW (1991)
Androgen-dependent vasopressinergic neurotransmission attenuates interleukin-1induced sickness behavior. Brain Res 557:
115–120
62. Abraham J et al (2008) Aging sensitizes mice
to behavioral deficits induced by central
HIV-1 gp120. Neurobiol Aging 29:614–621
63. Sherry CL et al (2009) Behavioral recovery
from acute hypoxia is reliant on leptin. Brain
Behav Immun 23(2):169–175
64. Cao JL et al (2010) Mesolimbic dopamine
neurons in the brain reward circuit mediate
susceptibility to social defeat and antidepressant action. J Neurosci 30(49):16453–16458
65. Basso AM et al (2009) Behavioral profile of
P2X7 receptor knockout mice in animal models of depression and anxiety: relevance for
neuropsychiatric disorders. Behav Brain Res
198:83–90
66. Buchanan JB, Sparkman NL, Johnson RW
(2010) A neurotoxic regimen of methamphetamine exacerbates the febrile and
neuroinflammatory response to a subsequent
peripheral
immune
stimulus.
J Neuroinflammation 7:82
67. Fanelli MT, Kaplan ML (1978) Effects of
high fat and high carbohydrate diets on the
body composition and oxygen consumption
of ob/ob mice. J Nutr 108(9):1491–1500
68. Jones BJ, Roberts DJ (1968) The quantitative measurement of motor incoordination in
naïve mice using and accelerating rotarod.
J Pharm Pharmacol 20(4):302–304
69. Tarantino LM, Gould TJ, Druhan JP, Bucan
M (2000) Behavior and mutagenesis screens:
the importance of baseline analysis of inbred
strains. Mamm Genome 11:555–564
70. Dang MT et al (2006) Disrupted motor
learning and long-term synaptic plasticity in
mice lacking NMDAR1 in the striatum. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 103(41):15254–15259
71. Carter RJ, Morton AJ, Dunnett SB (2001)
Motor coordination and balance in rodents.
Curr Protoc Neurosci Chapter 8:Unit 8.12
72. Loftis JM, Huckans M, Morasco BJ (2010)
Neuroimmune mechanisms of cytokineinduced depression: current theories and
novel treatment strategies. Neurobiol Dis
37:519–533
73. Deacon RMJ (2006) Burrowing in rodents: a
sensitive method for detecting behavioral dysfunction. Nat Protoc 1(1):118–121
74. Walf AA, Frye CA (2007) The use of the elevated plus maze as an assay of anxiety-related

13

Mouse Testing Methods in Psychoneuroimmunology…

behavior in rodents. Nat Protoc 2(2):
322–328
75. Cryan JF, Holmes A (2005) The ascent of
mouse: advances in modeling human depression and anxiety. Nat Rev Drug Discov 4:
775–790
76. Gould TD, Dao DT, Kovacsics CE (2009)
The open field test. In: Gould T (ed) Mood
and anxiety related phenotypes in mice: characterization using behavioral tests. Humana
Press, New York
77. Petit-Demouliere B, Chenu F, Bourin M
(2004) Forced swimming test in mice: a
review of antidepressant activity. Psychopharmacology 177:245–255
78. Komada M, Takao K, Miyakawa T (2008)
Elevated plus maze for mice. J Vis Exp 22:
e1088
79. Tonelli LH et al (2009) Allergic rhinitis
induces anxiety-like behavior and altered
social interaction in rodents. Brain Behav
Immun 23:784–793
80. Fromm L et al (2004) Magnesium attenuates
post-traumatic depression/anxiety following
diffuse traumatic brain injury in rats. J Am
Coll Nutr 23(5):529S–533S
81. Shepherd JK et al (1994) Behavioural and
pharmacological characterisation of the elevated “zero-maze” as an animal model of
anxiety. Psychopharmacology 116:56–64
82. Heisler LK et al (1998) Elevated anxiety and
antidepressant-like responses in serotonin
5-HT1A receptor knockout mutant mice. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:15049–15054
83. Cryan JF, Mombereau C, Vassout A (2005)
The tail suspension test as a model for assessing antidepressant activity: review of pharmacological and genetic studies in mice. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 29(4–5):571–625
84. Porsolt RD et al (2001) Rodent models of
depression: forced swimming and tail suspension behavioral despair tests in rats and mice.
Curr Protoc Neurosci 8.10A.1–8.10A.10
85. Lad HV et al (2007) Quantitative traits for
the tail suspension test: automation, optimization, and BXD RI mapping. Mamm
Genome 18:482–491
86. Steru L et al (1985) The tail suspension test:
a new method for screening antidepressants in
mice. Psychopharmacology 85:367–370
87. Cryan JF, Markou A, Lucki I (2002) Assessing
antidepressant activity in rodents: recent
developments and future needs. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 23(5):238–245
88. Cryan JF, Page ME, Lucki I (2005) Differential
behavioral effects of the antidepressants
reboxetine, fluoxetine, and moclobemide in a

275

modified forced swim test following chronic
treatment. Psychopharmacology 182:335–344
89. Moreau M et al (2008) Innoculation of
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin to mice induces an
acute episode of sickness behavior followed by
chronic depressive-like behavior. Brain Behav
Immun 22(7):1087–1095
90. Udo H et al (2008) Enhanced adult neurogenesis and angiogenesis and altered affective
behaviors in mice overexpressing vascular
endothelial growth factor 120. J Neurosci
28(53):14522–14536
91. Hédou G et al (2001) An automated analysis
of rat behavior in the forced swim test.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 70(1):65–76
92. DSM-IV (1994) Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders, 4th edn. American
Psychological Association, Washington, DC
93. Strekalova T, Steinbusch H (2009) Factors of
reproducibility of anhedonia induction in a
chronic stress depression model in mice. In:
Gould T (ed) Mood and anxiety related phenotypes in mice: characterization using behavioral tests. Humana Press, New York
94. Niemi MB et al (2008) Neuro-immune associative learning. In: Lajtha A, Galoyan A,
Besedovski HO (eds) Handbook of neurochemistry and molecular neurobiology.
Springer, New York
95. Brennan PA, Keverne EB (1997) Neural
mechanisms of mammalian olfactory learning.
Prog Neurobiol 51(4):457–481
96. Bryan KJ et al (2009) Chapter 1: transgenic
mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease:
behavioral testing and considerations. In:
Buccafusco JJ (ed) Methods of behavior
analysis in neuroscience, 2nd edn. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL
97. Bevins RA, Besheer J (2006) Object recognition in rats and mice: a one-trial non-matchingto-sample learning task to study ‘recognition
memory’. Nat Protoc 1(3):1306–1311
98. Stefanko DP et al (2009) Modulation of longterm memory for object recognition via
HDAC inhibition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
106(23):9447–9452
99. Win-Shwe TT, Fujimaki H (2012) Acute
administration of toluene affects memory
retention in novel object recognition test and
memory function-related gene expression in
mice. J Appl Toxicol 32(4):300–304
100. Wehner JM, Radcliffe RA (2004) Cued and
contextual fear conditioning in mice. Curr
Protoc Neurosci Chapter 8:Unit 8.5C
101. Deacon RMJ, Rawlins JNP (2006) T-maze
alternation in the rodent. Nat Protoc 1(1):
7–12

276

J.M. York et al.

102. Lalonde R (2002) The neurological basis of
spontaneous alternation. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev 26:91–104
103. Bekker A et al (2006) Isoflurane preserves
spatial working memory in adult mice after
moderate hypoxia. Anesth Analg 102:
1134–1138
104. Harrison FE et al (2006) Spatial and nonspatial escape strategies in the Barnes maze.
Learn Mem 13(6):809–819
105. O’Leary TP, Brown RE (2009) Visuo-spatial
learning and memory deficits on the Barnes
maze in the 16-month-old APPswe/PS1dE9
mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Behav
Brain Res 201:120–127
106. Vorhees CV, Williams MT (2006) Morris
water maze: procedures for assessing spatial
and related forms of learning and memory.
Nat Protoc 1(2):848–858

107. Rosczyk HA, Sparkman NL, Johnson RW
(2008) Neuroinflammation and cognitive
function in aged mice following minor surgery.
Exp Gerontol 43:840–846
108. Dishman RK et al (2006) Neurobiology of
exercise. Obesity 14:345–346
109. Leasure JL, Jones M (2008) Forced a voluntary exercise differentially affect brain and
behavior. Neuroscience 156:456–465
110. Garland TH Jr et al (2011) The biological
control of voluntary exercise, spontaneous
physical activity and daily energy expenditure
in relation to obesity: human and rodent perspectives. J Exp Biol 214(pt 2):206–229
111. Noakes TD (2011) Time to move behind a
brainless exercise physiology: the evidence
for complex regulation of human exercise
performance. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab 36:
23–35

Chapter 14
The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies
of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions
Boris Sakić
Abstract
The link between systemic autoimmunity, brain pathology, and aberrant behavior is still largely unexplored
field of biomedical science. Accumulating evidence points to causal relationships between immune factors,
neurodegeneration, and neuropsychiatric manifestations. By documenting autoimmunity-associated neuronal degeneration and cytotoxicity of the cerebrospinal fluid from disease-affected subjects, the murine
MRL model had shown high validity in revealing principal pathogenic circuits. In addition, unlike any
other autoimmune strain, MRL mice produce antibodies commonly found in patients suffering from lupus
and other autoimmune disorders. This review highlights importance of the MRL model as an indispensible
preparation in understanding the links between immune system and brain function.
Key words: Autoimmunity, Lupus, Behavioral dysfunction, Neurodegeneration, Immunopsychiatry,
Animal model

1. Introduction
1.1. Regulatory
Metasystem

The basic principal of life is to adapt to the relentlessly changing
environment, thus providing the basis for survival of an individual
and continuity of a species. When challenged by external and internal stressors, functional homeostasis in mammals regulates itself
through a coordinated network of the Regulatory Metasystem,
which comprises of diverse interactions between nervous, endocrine,
and immune systems (Fig. 1). While the nervous system is hardwired
to endocrine glands and immune organs via autonomic fibers, the
immune system communicates with other tissues by secreting various soluble messengers, such as cytokines, chemokines, and proteins
of the complement system (1). These mediators can affect brain
function by activating the vagal and other nerves (2), the secondary
messenger system of endothelial cells in brain vasculature (3), or by
diffusing into the brain parenchyma if the blood–brain barrier (BBB)

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_14, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

277

278

B. Sakić
Regulatory Metasystem

Behavior
• physical stressors (light, sound, heat, etc.)
• psychological stressors

Nervous System

HOMEOST ASIS
cytokines
Endocrine System

Immune System
hormones (e.g., steroids)

• viruses/bacteria
• toxins
• oncogens
• autoantigens

external stressors
internal stressors

Fig. 1. The principal network of mammal regulatory metasystem. When challenged by
various external and internal stressors, functional homeostasis regulates itself through
coordinated interactions between neuroendocrine and immune systems, which form the
Regulatory Metasystem. While the CNS is hardwired to endocrine glands and immune
organs via fibers of the autonomic nervous system, ANS, the immune system communicates with other organs and tissues via release of various soluble messengers that either
affect the brain directly via neural pathways (e.g., nervous vagus), or indirectly, by affecting hormonal activity in major endocrine pathways, such as hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Imbalanced homeostasis (or allostasis) ultimately results in increased production
of steroids and altered behavior, which are part of the adaptive responses to acute and
chronic stressors. Acute sickness behavior and cortisol release (corticosterone in animals)
are examples of an adaptive mechanism to acute exposure to pathogens. Different forms
of mental and neurodegenerative CNS illnesses are proposed to ensue in genetically susceptible organisms when disturbances in their Regulatory Metasystem become severe
and chronic. Systemic autoimmune diseases triggered by myriad of autoantigens (such as
in SLE) are example of chronic activation in the Regulatory Metasystem.

becomes more permeable. These factors can also alter behavior indirectly by changing hormonal activity in major endocrine pathways,
such as the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (4). Imbalanced
homeostasis (or allostasis) in this Regulatory Metasystem ultimately
results in altered behavior, which is an integral part of the adaptive
responses to acute and chronic stressors (5).

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

279

It is well established that acute and chronic stimuli from the
external environment activate neuroendocrine organs and hormones in several stages (6). Similarly, infiltrated pathogens and
toxins activate immune cells and organs, which subsequently signal
the central neuronal circuits that control diverse aspects of behavior. Sickness behavior is an archetype of an acute interaction
between immune response and an adaptive behavioral response
(7). Namely, initial activation of the immune system and behavioral
changes occur often within several hours or days. However, chronic
activation of the immune system in genetically susceptible individuals may result in various forms of brain dysfunction because of
sustained allostasis in the Regulatory Metasystem (8–10). Chronic
inflammation, allergy, and autoimmune reactions are examples of
sustained immune responses that have the potential to irreversibly
harm the brain and disturb the Regulatory Metasystem in a prolonged manner. If viewing this homeostatic network more broadly,
oncogens and autoantigens can be considered internal stressors
which trigger and maintain sustained immune reactions accompanied by diverse immune cells and their products. Given that immunocytes have a unique capacity to inactivate, destroy, and eliminate
other cells (including cells of own body), it is conceivable to assume
that they have potential to profoundly compromise brain morphology and function. Autoimmune diseases are notorious for their
chronicity and severity. As such, they pose a major threat to overall
homeostasis and normal brain functioning. Unfortunately, compartmentalization of modern biomedical science into separate disciplines is largely responsible for our ongoing inability to integrate
knowledge from different disciplines and gain deeper insight into
etiologies of brain disorders accompanied by sustained inflammatory
and autoimmune reactions. The sections below summarize a useful
animal model that has confirmed its face and construct validity
over the past 20 years and has become an indispensable tool in
unraveling principal connections between systemic autoimmunity
and the neuroendocrine system.
1.2. Involvement
of the Nervous System
in Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune/
inflammatory disorder with a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations. Despite its complexity in presentation and etiology, SLE is a
prime example of causal relationships between systemic autoimmunity, brain pathology, and aberrant behavior. Neurologic and psychiatric (NP) manifestations of unknown etiology occur in up to 75 %
of patients and are proposed to represent a more severe form of SLE
(11). They range from diffuse manifestations (e.g., depression, anxiety, confusion, psychosis) to focal CNS manifestations (i.e., seizures,
cerebrovascular disease, chorea, myelopathy, transverse myelitis,
demyelinating syndrome, aseptic meningitis). Moreover, disorders
of the peripheral nervous system (e.g., polyneuropathies, mononeuropathies, plexopathy, myasthenia gravis) are also common (12).

280

B. Sakić

A significant number of patients experience NP manifestations well
before disease onset, at the time of diagnosis, or within the first year
after diagnosis is established (13). While a histologically normal brain
is a possible finding in NP SLE (or CNS SLE), hypoperfusion (14–
17) and regional metabolic abnormalities (18–20) are common neuropathological finding on brain imaging. Brain atrophy, however, is
the most frequent observation on CT scans (21–26) and is proposed
to reflect widespread and progressive neuronal loss (27, 28).
Apart from complications induced by kidney damage, infections, and steroid therapy, more recent studies confirm autoimmunity as a primary mechanism in the etiology of CNS lupus.
Autoantibodies in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of lupus
patients have been proposed as a key factor in brain damage (29).
Increased intrathecal synthesis (as revealed by an elevated IgG
index and oligoclonal banding) in patients with CNS dysfunction
(30–32) and antigen-specific autoantibodies in the CSF (33) are
shown to be associated with NP manifestations (34). In many
cases, however, the correlational nature of clinical data has led to
the necessity for animal models. In experimental studies, interactions between autoimmune/inflammatory phenomena and brain
function can be examined in a more systematic and direct way.
More importantly, due to ethical reasons, cause–effect relationships between specific immune factors and changes in behavior
cannot be tested in clinical studies. They can be studied exclusively
with well-controlled animal models that have significant face, construct, and predictive validity (35).

2. The MRL Model
2.1. Development

Most commonly studied spontaneous models of SLE include the
NZB, (NZB × NZW)F1 hybrid, BXSB, and MRL mouse strains. They
are characterized by a wide spectrum of autoimmune manifestations (36) and share common characteristics, such as hypergammaglobulinemia and elevated antinuclear antibodies (ANA), which
are serological hallmarks of SLE. Since no animal model is a replica
of human brain disease, each of these strains has distinct features
that make them less or more useful in studying certain aspects of
CNS SLE. Due to profound deficits in behavior of MRL/MpJFaslpr/J (MRL/lpr) mice that appear at a high frequency during
the onset of spontaneous CNS SLE-like disease, my research over
the past 20 years has focused on the nature of behavioral dysfunction during systemic autoimmunity and validity of the MRL model
in studies of CNS SLE pathogenesis (37, 38).
There is no doubt that many murine models have made
significant contributions to our understanding of SLE in general,
and CNS SLE in particular (39). However, the MRL model has

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

281

several advantages over the other strains. First, MRL mice do not
have a high incidence of inherited brain abnormalities (40) that
may confound assessment of autoimmunity-induced changes in
brain function. They also produce antibodies that are common in
SLE patients. Furthermore, MRL mice are convenient for longitudinal studies because they develop autoimmune manifestations
early in life (41). Since MRL mice are among the biggest in the
mouse kingdom, technically demanding procedures are feasible
(e.g., CSF collection from the cisterna magna, retro-orbital bleeding, intra-cerebro-ventricular cannulation). Most importantly,
there are two congenic substrains that differ in <0.1 % of their
genetic background and disease onset. High levels of circulating
cytokines, autoantibodies, and behavioral deficits appear in the
MRL/MpJ-Faslpr/J substrain (MRL/lpr, stock 485 in The Jackson
Laboratories) within the first 2 months of life (42). Conversely, the
congenic MRL/MpJ (MRL+/+) mice (stock 486) develop lupuslike disease much later in life and are asymptomatic at this age, thus
representing an adequate control. Indeed, the traits above have
helped in establishing the MRL model of CNS SLE, which is
largely based on discrepancy in behavior and brain morphology
between MRL/lpr and MRL+/+ mice (43).
The MRL/MpJ lymphoproliferation wild-type strain was generated at The Jackson Laboratory from a series of crosses with strains
C57BL/6J (0.3 %), C3H/HeDi (12.1 %), AKR/J (12.6 %), and
LG/J (75 %) (Fig. 2). During development of this strain, the spontaneous mutation Faslpr was found in MRL/lpr mice at F12. This
mutation of a single autosomal recessive gene (designated lymphoproliferative, lpr gene) on chromosome 19 results in massive lymphoadenopathy, induced by the accumulation of abnormal
T-lymphocytes (44). There is also a spontaneous loss of function
associated with the Fas mutation, which leads to a deficit in apoptotic
Fas receptor (FasR) expression in MRL/lpr mice (45, 46). Largely
due to aberrant apoptosis of self-reactive clones in the thymus (44),
these mice develop an accelerated form of SLE-like disease, characterized by skin lesions, alopecia, arthritis, and immune complex
glomerulonephrosis. Starting around 3 months of age, levels of circulating immune complexes rise promptly in the MRL/lpr substrain, but not in MRL+/+ controls (41). Female MRL/lpr mice die
at an average age of 17 weeks of age and males at 22 weeks.
In a series of early studies, we documented brain pathology,
CSF cytotoxicity, and deficits in emotional reactivity of both male
and female MRL/lpr mice (38). However, we were also aware that
the expression of FasR plays an important role in neuronal apoptosis during postnatal development (47). Although the effectiveness
of immunosuppressive treatment in preserving normal neuronal
morphology pointed to a pathogenic role of autoimmunity (48–
51), the possibility that the FasR deficiency in the CNS contributes
to aberrant behavior in the MRL/lpr substrain could not be rejected
until a new, long-lived stock of MRL/lpr mice was generated.

282

B. Sakić
LG/J (75%)

AKR/J (12.6%)

C3H/HeDi (12.1%)

C57BL/6J (0.3%)

MRL/MpJ substrain
(stock 486)

MRL/MpJ-Faslpr/J substrain
(stock 485)

?
MRL/MpJ lpr/Fas substrain
(stock 6825)

Fig. 2. Genetic background of the MRL mouse strain. Four different strains of mice were
used in mid-1970s to produce the lupus-prone MRL strain in The Jackson Laboratories.
In comparison to the original stock 486, spontaneous Faslpr mutation accounted for accelerated disease development in the stock 485 (MRL/lpr mice, shown on the picture).
However, unexplained decline in autoimmune phenotype was observed in this stock over
the past decade, and the subsequent stock was labeled 6825. As the stock 485, it carries
the Faslpr mutation, thus rendering this group a more adequate control in behavioral
studies that test causal links between systemic autoimmunity and brain damage.

Namely, a gradual decline in the autoimmune phenotype was
observed in the MRL/lpr colony over the past decade. This phenomenon of unknown origin was also accompanied by a gradual
decline in the number and severity of behavioral deficits (52). In
2007, the supplier (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) publicly announced phenotype loss in the stock 485 and re-assigned it
into stock 6825 (MRL/MpJ-Faslpr/JJ), which still carried the FasR
deficiency in their genome (http://jaxmice.jax.org/strain/006825.
html). Since embryos of the original stock 485 were cryopreserved
in 1993, the original MRL/lpr stock was re-established in the summer of 2008. In brief, stock 485 has been proposed as a model of
CNS SLE in reference to control stock 486 (37, 53), while stock
6825 (“mutated” stock 485) emerged as a new, improved control
group because it shares FasR deficiency with the stock 485.
2.2. AutoimmunityAssociated Behavioral
Syndrome

MRL/lpr and MRL+/+ mice are comparable in many respects (e.g.,
appearance, size, reproductive age), except in the onset of autoimmunity and neurobehavioral dysfunction. Disease progression in
MRL/lpr mice parallels emergence of behavioral deficits often seen
after exposure to chronic stressors (37). The constellation of behavioral differences between age- and sex-matched MRL/lpr and

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

283

MRL+/+ mice was operationally termed “autoimmunity-associated
behavioral syndrome” (AABS), which has been largely characterized by progressive anxiety- and depressive-like behaviors (38).
These constructs were supported by increased thigmotaxis of
MRL/lpr mice in large arenas, impaired exploration of novel
objects and spaces, performance deficits in the plus-maze and stepdown tests, excessive floating in the forced swim test (54–56),
reduced responsiveness to palatable stimulation (49, 57), and
reduced isolation-induced inter-male fighting (58). Moreover,
their “cognitive inflexibility” and poor spatial learning were noted
in the Morris water maze (59, 60) and spontaneous alternation test
(51). In addition, diseased MRL/lpr animals show lower nocturnal and open-field activity levels, as well as significant deficiencies
in neurological (60, 61) and psychomotor tests (62).
2.3. Breached Blood–
Brain Barrier

The BBB is formed by endothelial cells that tightly line capillaries
and blood vessels of the brain. The BBB has an important role in
maintaining a well-regulated CNS micro-environment for reliable
neuronal signaling. When its normal function is disrupted, large
molecules and cells can infiltrate into the brain and lead to CNS
damage. In many CNS SLE patients, the BBB becomes transiently
or permanently breached, as evidenced by an increased albumin
quotient (63). Increased BBB permeability is an important permissive condition which allows diffusion of cytokines and antineuronal
auto-antibodies into CSF and accounts for subsequent CNS manifestations (64).
Similar to patients, a breached BBB has been observed in diseased MRL/lpr mice. This damage occurs at a very early age (7–8
weeks) and is evidenced by perivascular leakage of IgG antibodies
and increased albumin levels in the CSF (65, 66). In addition to
soluble factors, significant infiltration of macrophages, T cells, B
cells, and plasma cells can be demonstrated in the choroid plexus,
meninges, and brain parenchyma of MRL/lpr mice (60, 67–69).

2.4. CNS Inflammation

The role of neuroinflammation is emerging as an important component of lupus-like disease. In addition to the previously mentioned infiltration of immunocytes into the brain parenchyma,
several other types of inflammation-related pathologies have been
observed in brains of MRL/lpr mice. They include upregulation of
adhesion molecules (70, 71), the expression of mRNA for proinflammatory cytokines (72, 73), and deposition of complement
proteins (74) within brains of MRL/lpr mice. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) upregulation (75) and F4/80 microglia
staining provides additional evidence for microglia-induced neuronal excitotoxicity in these animals (76). When assessing the
global pattern of neuronal damage in MRL/lpr brains (77), a pattern of degeneration emerges that is typically seen in hydrocephalus, meningoencephalitis, and hypoglycemic encephalopathy

284

B. Sakić

(78–82), all of which result in cerebritis. Supporting this notion,
others have reported that MRL/lpr mice have an increased incidence of hydrocephalus (83), meningoencephalitis (67), and
altered glucose metabolism (84), with complement activation as a
likely precursor to cerebral edema (85).
Congenic MRL+/+ animals were found to have greater cell loss
and a more aggressive, sustained microglial inflammatory response
following mechanical injury and breakdown of the BBB (86).
Unlike MRL/lpr animals, which develop spontaneous BBB disruption, MRL+/+ mice do not show evidence of CNS damage under
normal conditions. However, the MRL strain may have an inherent propensity toward exaggerated CNS inflammatory responses.
For example, considering the substantia nigra of mice have more
microglia than other areas (87), one may assume that this neuroanatomical trait in lupus mice reflects the region-specific susceptibility to inflammatory and excitotoxic metabolites produced by
activated microglia (88).
While neuroinflammation appears to be a contributing factor
to disease in MRL/lpr animals, a distinct inflammatory response is
not commonly seen in the brains of lupus patients. Some of the
most common neuropathological findings in SLE, however, are
small vessel cerebral vasculopathy and micro-infarcts. These
observed features likely reflect the end result of repeated episodes
of acute inflammation in the small brain vessels (89). Elevated levels
of soluble adhesion molecules in serum and CSF of patients with
CNS involvement (90) also suggests that neuroinflammatory conditions may play an understated role in certain NP manifestations.
2.5. Brain Pathology

Clinical studies clearly demonstrate that NP manifestations are
accompanied by cerebral atrophy (91), progressive neuronal loss
(19, 27), and parenchymal lesions (92). Similar to CNS SLE
patients and effects of chronic stress, MRL/lpr mice show brain
atrophy and ventricular enlargement alongside behavioral deficits
detected at the onset of SLE-like disease (51, 93, 94).
The MRL strain does not show a high incidence of inherited
neuroanatomical abnormalities (40), which minimize the possibility of congenital defects confounding the study of disease-induced
neurodegeneration. At the onset of autoimmune symptoms in
MRL/lpr mice, reports of reduced complexity of pyramidal neurons, reduced brain weights (94), and selectively neurotoxic CSF
(95) provided indirect evidence of neuronal damage in diseased
animals. Direct evidence of neuronal death, however, was first
confirmed in MRL/lpr brains using the Fluoro Jade B (FJB)
cytochemical stain (specific for dying neurons). A small percentage
of these neurons were subsequently found to contain TdT-labeled
apoptotic nuclei and co-localized with FJB (77) and antineurofilament
staining (74). Moreover, while the size of hippocampal fields and
neuronal density are not reduced in young Fas-deficient lpr mice

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

285

(96), cell densities are reduced within the hippocampus, cortex
(51), and midbrain (88) of aged/diseased lupus mice.
In addition to mature neurons, recent findings suggest that
progenitor cells also degenerate in MRL/lpr brains. More
specifically, the subventricular zone (97), subgranular zone (76,
77), and substantia nigra (88), all of which are known to contain
proliferative progenitor cells capable of neurogenesis (98), show
signs of damage. CSF from diseased lupus mice is also cytotoxic to
neurons and neuronal progenitor cells in vitro (99), thus supporting a link between toxic CSF IgG and neuronal/progenitor cell
damage (66). If in vitro findings are predictive of in vivo events,
then autoimmune-induced lesions of germinal layers may reduce
the developmental and regenerative capacity of MRL/lpr brains.
An impairment in this process would likely exacerbate subsequent
autoimmune/inflammatory-mediated neuronal death and behavioral deficits. For example, an impaired capacity for hippocampal
neurogenesis could account for the cognitive impairments observed
in these animals (51). Stress hormones, known to be chronically
elevated in lupus mice (100), have also been shown to inhibit cell
proliferation and neurogenesis (101). Therefore, one may assume
that such mechanisms account for impaired brain growth and
regeneration along the progression of autoimmune disease.
Despite parallels between the emergence of behavioral dysfunction and systemic autoimmunity, there is no firm evidence that
brain pathology accounts for aberrant behavior in the MRL model.
However, significant correlations suggest principal links between
structural brain damage and functional/behavioral impairments in
MRL/lpr mice. For example, deficits in spatial learning/memory
emerge concomitantly with hippocampal damage (51), aberrant
performance in the sucrose preference test coincide with lesions of
the nucleus accumbens (102), and decreased locomotor activity
accompany degeneration in the substantia nigra (88). Although
the mechanisms underlying these deficits are not well understood
(103), recent pharmacological evidence supports a link between
dopaminergic circuit damage and AABS.
2.6. Proposed
Neuropathogenic
Factors and
Mechanisms

The causative role of autoimmunity and inflammation in the pathogenesis of AABS has been supported by studies employing the
immunosuppressive drug cyclophosphamide (CY). Sustained
treatment with CY from an early age prevents several behavioral
deficits and brain pathology in MRL/lpr mice (49–51, 68). More
specifically, CY abolishes substrain differences in anxiety- and motivation-related behaviors, as suggested by restored novel object
exploration, increased responsiveness to a palatable sucrose solution, and normalized nocturnal activity. Although systemic autoimmunity and inflammation have been proposed as key factors, the
possibility that subtle genetic dissimilarities, imbalanced hormonal
production, and peripheral tissue involvement contribute to certain

286

B. Sakić

aspects of AABS could not be discounted. However, the use of
newly developed stock 6825 rejected the possibility that AABS is
entirely accounted by FasR mutation in neuronal cells. Namely, the
constellation of differences between the lpr stocks 485 and 6825
confirmed the hypothesis that the lpr mutation per se does not
fully account for the brain pathology and altered behavior in the
stock 485 (104). Together with significant correlations between
immunological and behavioral measures, this study suggested that
soluble immune factors play a key role in CNS pathogenesis. In
addition, combined use of immunoprecipitation with homogenates of unaffected brains, 2-dimensional differential in-gel electrophoresis, and mass spectrometry revealed strong binding of
CSF IgG antibodies to cytoskeletal antigens in brains of MRL/lpr
mice. This finding is consistent with the proposed pathogenic role
of brain-reactive autoantibodies (BRA) in the etiology of AABS.
CNS SLE is frequently accompanied by BRA cross-reactive
with diverse brain-specific and systemic antigens (11). Most of these
autoantibodies have been identified on the basis of their binding to
tissues and cells, including neuroblastoma and glioblastoma cell
lines (105). There are also autoantibodies against lymphocytes,
capable of being adsorbed by brain tissue (106, 107). Some antibodies can react specifically to CNS neurons (108, 109), neuronal
cytoplasm (110), and neuronal receptors (111, 112). A current
literature review proposes approximately 20 pathogenic BRA
(113), including antiribosomal, anticardiolipin, antiphospholipid,
and more recently antibodies to an NMDA receptor, or anti-NR2
antibodies (29, 111, 114–119). Consistent with clinical findings in
CNS SLE patients (120–123), our recent study with MRL/lpr
mice revealed significant reactivity of their CSF and serum IgG
molecules to cytoskeletal proteins (104). When the source of BRA
is considered, both clinical studies and studies with MRL/lpr mice
suggest that BRA from CSF are more pathogenic than BRA from
serum (95, 99, 124–126). While the mechanism by which circulating BRAs access the brain is not well understood, aberrant behavioral and emotional manifestations in human and murine forms of
lupus suggest that multiple CNS antigens and sites are targeted
(111, 117, 118, 127–129). A significant relationship between
aberrant behavioral performance and specific BRA has been
reported in diseased MRL/lpr mice (130–132). However, certain
subsets of BRA might be more important in the induction of permanent neuronal damage, while other subsets might merely affect
neuronal functioning in a transient fashion (133). Given these
complex modes of action, more direct, invasive studies are required
to prove causality between specific classes of pathogenic BRA and
certain behavioral deficit/brain pathology.
A dysregulated cytokine network is also hypothesized to play
an important role in the etiology of CNS SLE. In general, proinflammatory cytokines are instrumental in expanding peripheral

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

287

immune reactions to the CNS via endothelial activation (63, 134).
Early increases in serum levels of IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, and interferon-gamma are principal events facilitating the hyperproduction
and maintenance of autoantibodies in the MRL/lpr substrain (57,
135–137). A significant correlation between serum IL-6 levels and
responsiveness to a palatable stimulus was documented in MRl/lpr
mice (138). Using adeno-vector methodology, a direct cause–
effect relationship was shown for both IL-6 and interferon-gamma
(139, 140). Similarly, administration of TNF-α enhanced intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-dependent leukocyte–endothelial
interactions in MRL/lpr brains (141). Furthermore, these interactions can be prevented by antibody blockade of pro-inflammatory
cytokines or ICAM (61, 70). It is important to emphasize that
small amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines can also cross the
BBB by specific transport mechanisms (142–144) and activate
receptors on endothelial cells of the brain vasculature to release
other mediators (e.g., cytokines, nitric oxide, prostaglandins) into
the CSF and brain parenchyma (145, 146). However, it remains to
be determined whether physiological doses of circulating cytokines
can compromise viability of central neurons. On the other hand, it
is well documented that pro-inflammatory cytokines have the ability to affect the stress hormone system and alter behavior (147–
151). More specifically, these cytokines can regulate corticosteroid
levels and autoimmunity through receptors in adrenal gland and
pituitary (150, 152–155). Sustained activation of the pituitaryadrenal axis in MRL/lpr mice is evidenced by increased central
expression of arginine/vasopressin mRNA (156, 157) and high
levels of corticosterone (100). Although an imbalanced neuroimmuno-endocrine network is confirmed to play a key role in the
etiology of brain damage, it is still not clear to which extent central
neurons are damaged by an inflammation-driven upregulation in
corticosterone production vs. direct cytotoxicity of self-reactive
immunocytes and their products. Corticosterone-induced atrophy
of neurons may be reversible, but it can also be indicative of an
early stage of neurodegeneration (158, 159). Indeed, diseased
MRL/lpr mice show profound neuronal spine loss (94) which can
be further exacerbated with chronic pretreatment with corticosterone. Namely, sustained corticosterone administration attenuated
signs of autoimmune disease, but lead to profound dendritic spine
deterioration, as revealed by the Golgi method (160). Therefore,
based on chronically elevated serum corticosterone levels in MRL/
lpr mice (100), one may hypothesize that sustained endogenous
immunosuppression is a precursor and necessary factor for neurodegenerative events that occur when autoimmune mechanisms
prevail at later stages of the disease (Fig. 3). Indeed, changes in the
morphology of neuronal dendrites, cerebral atrophy, and immunoreactive ubiquitin particles (denoting axon terminal degeneration)
occur by 14 weeks of age in MRL/lpr brains, but progressive

288

B. Sakić

Fig. 3. Proposed phases and pathways of the CNS damage during systemic autoimmune disease. Behavioral dysfunction
and brain damage in lupus-like disease may result from chronic stress-like response induced by sustained autoimmunity
and inflammation. In SLE patients and lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice, spontaneous onset of systemic inflammation and autoimmunity are characterized by increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which may activate pituitary-adrenal axis
and promote sustained release of glucocorticoids. In turn, steroid hormones suppress the immune system at multiple levels.
Due to chronic nature of the disease, glucocorticoids, cytokines, and other immune components remain elevated, thus
compromising the integrity of the blood–brain barrier and neuronal function. (a) The inflammatory phase is largely associated with early functional damage of the brain. The upregulation in circulating proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6,
TNF-α, and IFN-γ) is an initial serologic event that disturbs activity of the immune network. These cytokines can also
activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (1), which down-regulates peripheral inflammation via increased production of steroid hormones, SHs (2). However, in addition to the activation of major inhibitory signals from the hippocampus

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

289

neurodegeneration and microglial activation do not become
pronounced until terminal stages of the disease (~5 months). Few
MRL/lpr mice survive beyond 6 months of age (36), which may
be attributed to profound CNS damage and brain edema (84). It
is viable that such sustained “allostatic load” may ultimately provide the basis for vulnerability of central neurons (161), bona fide
neurodegeneration, and behavioral dysfunction (51, 77, 94).
Future studies examining the effects of cytokines on the endocrine
axes and the possibility that adrenalectomy prevents (or delays)
central neurodegeneration in MRL/lpr mice are warranted.
Aberrant cytokine production also modulates systemic autoimmunity by sustained activation of B-cells, which later differentiate
into pathogenic autoantibody-forming cells. These pathogenic
autoantibodies are a prelude to immune complex disease (162), a
common feature of lupus. Indeed, deposition of antigen–antibody
complexes (immune aggregates) in choroidal blood vessels have
been associated with NP manifestations, while vascular deposits
within the choroid plexus (CP) are accompanied by histopathological evidence of inflammation (163). Therefore, autoantibodies
to endothelial cells, as well as the pathogenic action of circulatingimmune complexes (CIC) on microvessels, likely contribute to, if
not cause, endothelial cell damage and breakdown of the BBB in
lupus patients and MRL/lpr mice (63, 66, 69). Subsequent
infiltration of various immunocytes into the brain parenchyma of
MRL/lpr mice (68, 69) may merely be another step in a cascade of
neuropathogenic events.
There are numerous factors that can induce excitotoxic damage.
In an injured or immunologically challenged brain, cytokineproducing microglia appear to play an important role. Microglia
readily activate by transforming from a ramified, resting state into
amoeboid cells that express MHC molecules (87), as seen in MRL/
lpr brains (75). Inflammatory responses are then perpetuated by
both cyclooxygenase (COX) and nitric oxide (NO). In MRL/lpr
mice, however, abnormalities in prostaglandin production were
reported (164), likely rendering COX inhibition ineffective in
ameliorating AABS (76). Indirectly, these results suggest that
inducible NO synthase and the glutamate system are important
Fig. 3. (continued) to hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus, sustained binding of steroids to receptors in central neurons (3)
induces stress-like manifestations (e.g., emotional disturbances, impaired mood, etc.) which are largely under control of
the limbic system. This effect on brain function is further amplified by cytokine-induced activation of the nervous vagus
and activation of glial cells in the hypothalamus (4). Moreover, activated lymphocytes (5) and cytokine-induced overexpression of cell adhesion molecules on endothelial cells of the BBB and choroid plexus, CP (6) are conducive of immunocyte
entrapment (7). (b) The autoimmune phase is largely characterized by structural damage, such as neurodegeneration and
brain atrophy. Chronic inflammatory responses increase the permeability of the BBB and CP, thus leading to infiltration of
immunocytes into perivascular spaces and cerebrospinal fluid (8). Structural brain damage can result from neurotoxic
metabolites that accumulate after sustained activation of microglia (9) and chronic binding of brain-reactive antibodies
(BRA) to adult and immature neurons (10). Loss of periventricular and cortical mass may underlie psychosis, dementia, and
seizures that frequently accompany neuropsychiatric lupus. Note: dashed lines represent inhibitory pathways.

290

B. Sakić
neurons

B cells

antibodies

MAC

complement
T cells

chemokines

cytokines MMP
ROS

oligodendrocytes

macrophages
blood-brain barrier

PGE
microglia
astrocytes

Fig. 4. Summary of putative factors and cellular mechanisms underlying neuronal damage in CNS lupus. When BBB is
breached, various immune cells and mediators can compromise the viability of brain cells at different stages of disease
progress, age, and genetic deficits in affected individuals. These factors include cytotoxic T cells, macrophages, brainreactive antibodies to surface and intracellular receptors, the C5b-9 MAC, MMPs, and reactive oxygen species, ROS.

mediators of neuroinflammation and neuronal apoptosis in these
animals (74). Ultrastructural evidence obtained from electron
microscopy (76) and a study reporting significant increases in glutamine, glutamate, and lactate concentrations in MRL/lpr brains
(84) support the notion of excitotoxic neuronal death. In the case
of glutamate toxicity, this hypothesis is supported by evidence of
anti-NMDA receptor antibodies resulting in neuronal apoptosis in
the mouse brain (111), a similar IgG-mediated mechanism induced
by CSF from MRL/lpr mice (99), and the presence of high levels
of anti-NMDA receptor antibodies in their CSF (Betty Diamond,
personal communication). Considering that anti-CD4 treatment
(165) and complement inhibitors (74, 166) ameliorated CNS disease in MRL/lpr mice, one may assume that combination of cellular inflammatory and autoimmune factors (operational at different
stages of the disease) underlies brain pathology and aberrant behavior (summarized in Fig. 4).
In comparison to other neurotransmitters, central dopamine
system activity (implicated in reward, movement, and cognitive processes) is most profoundly altered in brains of MRL/lpr mice (167).
A series of pharmacological studies suggest that damage to central
dopaminergic circuits accounts for at least some behavioral deficits
in this substrain. In particular, chronic injection with the selective
D2/D3 agonist quinpirole induced self-injurious behavior (168),

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

291

while acute injection with the selective D1/D2 dopamine agonist
apomorphine increased rotational behavior (88). In the sucrose
preference paradigm, acute injection with the indirect dopamine
agonist d-amphetamine failed to alter the response rates of diseased
animals to sucrose solutions (102). Taken together, these results
link neuropathological findings of dopaminergic cell death in nigrostriatal, mesolimbic, and mesocortical pathways to behavioral deficits
in locomotion, motivated behavior, and learning. Although the
contribution of peripheral disease manifestations on behavioral performance cannot be excluded, these results support the hypothesis
that the dopamine system is affected in MRL/lpr brains and underlies
changes in emotional reactivity and motivated behavior.

3. Summary
Compared to other models of systemic autoimmune disease, the
MRL model has several key characteristics that render it an indispensable tool in studies of autoimmunity–brain interactions (43).
First, compared to “induced” models of CNS SLE, MRL/lpr mice
spontaneously develop manifestations that match the human disorder in complexity, chronicity, and severity. This includes a variety of
intrathecal BRA and brain atrophy, which are both characteristic of
more severe forms of CNS SLE. Second, in behavioral studies, the
MRL model is well controlled with MRL+/+ (stock 486) and MRL/
lpr/JJ groups (stock 6825). The differences in genomes are <0.1 %
(when compared to stock 486) and even less in case of stock 6825.
Lastly, the MRL model is well defined at genetic, cellular, and
behavioral levels. In particular, the lpr lesion (encoding for FasR
deficiency) on chromosome 19, “double negative” clones of lymphocytes, neurodegeneration, and behavioral deficits are well
explored phenomena, replicated by different research groups. This
abundance of knowledge allows diverse manipulations at all system
levels, thus advancing our understanding of relationships between
genes, autoimmunity, and brain dysfunction.
The roles of stress hormones in initial modulation of brain
morphology and behavior of MRL/lpr mice appear important
(100) and may act similar to iatrogenic effects of sustained corticosteroid therapy on brains of CNS SLE patients (25). Progressive
neuronal death and microglial activation are concomitant with the
development of more severe systemic autoimmune/inflammatory
disease and more diverse AABS. Although other neurotransmitter
systems are likely involved, dopaminergic neurons seem to be a
specific target of autoimmune reactions, possibly accounting for
early deficits in emotional reactivity and motivated behavior.
Further interplay among activated microglia, neuroactive cytokines, BRA, and cytotoxic T-cells likely leads to an accumulation of

292

B. Sakić

neurotoxic metabolites, edema, and brain atrophy. Although adult
neurons and neural progenitors are targeted in diseased MRL/lpr
mice (88, 95, 99, 169), the possible effect of autoimmunity on
brain cells may be extended into prenatal life and influences from
the maternal immune system (170).
While the MRL/lpr substrain displays many characteristics that
resemble human CNS SLE, there are limitations which need be
considered when studying this model. First, human CNS SLE has
relapsing–remitting presentations of symptoms, while MRL/lpr
mice show a progressive and unrelenting course of disease. Second,
human SLE shows a strong gender preference (i.e., about 9–10
times more female than male patients). Although the disease starts
few weeks earlier in female mice, the MRL/lpr substrain does not
show such gender bias, possibly due to a different hormonal milieu
in human and murine forms of lupus. Lastly, while more sophisticated assessments are administered in diagnosing human CNS SLE,
“psychiatric manifestations” in MRL/lpr mice are merely constructs
that can be proposed from dissimilar performances in behavioral
tests. Despite these limitations, the MRL model remains useful and
unique in understanding the complex immuno-neuroendocrine
interactions. There is no doubt that deeper understanding of pathogenic pathways and neurotoxic mediators in these animals may help
in elucidating CNS SLE etiology and provide a basis for new treatment modalities in brain disorders with autoimmune origin.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the grant from the Ontario Mental
Health Foundation.
References
1. Ader R, Felten D, Cohen N (2001)
Psychoneuroimmunology. Academic Press,
New York
2. Goehler LE, Gaykema RP, Hansen MK,
Anderson K, Maier SF, Watkins LR (2000)
Vagal immune-to-brain communication: a visceral chemosensory pathway. Auton Neurosci
85:49–59
3. Benveniste EN, Huneycutt BS, Shrikant P,
Ballestas ME (1995) Second messenger systems in the regulation of cytokines and adhesion molecules in the central nervous system.
Brain Behav Immun 9:304–314
4. Dunn AJ (2000) Cytokine activation of the
HPA axis. Ann N Y Acad Sci 917:608–617
5. McEwen BS (2000) Allostasis and allostatic
load: implications for neuropsychopharmacology. Neuropsychopharmacology 22:108–124

6. Johnson EO, Kamilaris TC, Chrousos GP,
Gold PW (1992) Mechanisms of stress: a
dynamic overview of hormonal and behavioral homeostasis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
16:115–130
7. Dantzer R, O’Connor JC, Freund GG,
Johnson RW, Kelley KW (2008) From
inflammation to sickness and depression:
when the immune system subjugates the
brain. Nat Rev Neurosci 9:46–56
8. McEwen BS (2003) Mood disorders and allostatic load. Biol Psychiatry 54:200–207
9. McEwen BS, Biron CA, Brunson KW,
Bulloch K, Chambers WH, Dhabhar FS,
Goldfarb RH, Kitson RP, Miller AH, Spencer
RL, Weiss JM (1997) The role of adrenocorticoids as modulators of immune function in
health and disease: neural, endocrine and

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

immune interactions. Brain Res Rev 23:
79–133
10. Cotman CW, Brinton RE, Galaburda A,
McEwen B, Schneider DM (1987) The
neuro-immune-endocrine connection. Raven,
New York
11. Hanly JG (2005) Neuropsychiatric lupus.
Rheum Dis Clin North Am 31:273–298, vi
12. Tincani A, Brey R, Balestrieri G, Vitali C,
Doria A, Galeazzi M, Meroni PL, Migliorini
P, Neri R, Tavoni A, Bombardieri S (1996)
International survey on the management of
patients with SLE.2. The results of a questionnaire regarding neuropsychiatric manifestations. Clin Exp Rheumatol 14:S23–S29
13. van Dam AP, Wekking EM, Oomen HA
(1991) Psychiatric symptoms as features of
systemic lupus erythematosus. Psychother
Psychosom 55:132–140
14. Colamussi P, Giganti M, Cittanti C, Dovigo L,
Trotta F, Tola MR, Tamarozzi R, Lucignani G,
Piffanelli A (1995) Brain single-photon emission tomography with Tc-99m-HMPAO in
neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus: relations with EEG and MRI findings and
clinical manifestations. Eur J Nucl Med 22:
17–24
15. Handa R, Sahota P, Kumar M, Jagannathan NR,
Bal CS, Gulati M, Tripathi BM, Wali JP (2003)
In vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) and single photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) in systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Magn Reson
Imaging 21:1033–1037
16. Huang WS, Chiu PY, Tsai CH, Kao A, Lee CC
(2002) Objective evidence of abnormal
regional cerebral blood flow in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus on Tc-99m ECD
brain SPECT. Rheumatol Int 22:178–181
17. Lopez-Longo FJ, Carol N, Almoguera MI,
Olazaran J, Onso-Farto JC, Ortega A,
Monteagudo I, Gonzalez CM, Carreno L
(2003) Cerebral hypoperfusion detected by
SPECT in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus is related to clinical activity and cumulative tissue damage. Lupus 12:813–819
18. Komatsu N, Kodama K, Yamanouchi N,
Okada S, Noda S, Nawata Y, Takabayashi K,
Iwamoto I, Saito Y, Uchida Y, Ito H,
Yoshikawa K, Sato T (1999) Decreased
regional cerebral metabolic rate for glucose
in systemic lupus erythematosus patients
with psychiatric symptoms. Eur Neurol
42:41–48
19. Brooks WM, Sabet A, Sibbitt WL, Barker PB,
van Zijl PC, Duyn JH, Moonen CT (1997)
Neurochemistry of brain lesions determined
by spectroscopic imaging in systemic lupus
erythematosus. J Rheumatol 24:2323–2329

293

20. Volkow ND, Warner N, McIntyre R,
Valentine A, Kulkarni M, Mullani N, Gould L
(1988) Cerebral involvement in systemic
lupus erythematosus. Am J Physiol Imaging
3:91–98
21. Gonzalez-Scarano F, Lisak RP, Bilaniuk LT,
Zimmerman RA, Atkins PC, Zweiman B
(1979) Cranial computed tomography in the
diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Ann Neurol 5:158–165
22. Kaell AT, Shetty M, Lee BC, Lockshin MD
(1986) The diversity of neurologic events in
systemic lupus erythematosus. Prospective
clinical
and
computed
tomographic
classification of 82 events in 71 patients. Arch
Neurol 43:273–276
23. Miguel EC, Pereira RM, Pereira CA, Baer L,
Gomes RE, de Sa LC, Hirsch R, de Barros NG,
de Navarro JM, Gentil V (1994) Psychiatric
manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus: clinical features, symptoms, and signs of
central nervous system activity in 43 patients.
Medicine 73:224–232
24. Omdal R, Selseth B, Klow NE, Husby G,
Mellgren SI (1989) Clinical neurological,
electrophysiological, and cerebral CT scan
findings in systemic lupus erythematosus.
Scand J Rheumatol 18:283–289
25. Ainiala H, Dastidar P, Loukkola J, Lehtimaki
T, Korpela M, Peltola J, Hietaharju A (2005)
Cerebral MRI abnormalities and their association with neuropsychiatric manifestations in
SLE: a population-based study. Scand J
Rheumatol 34:376–382
26. Waterloo K, Omdal R, Jacobsen EA, Klow
NE, Husby G, Torbergsen T, Mellgren SI
(1999) Cerebral computed tomography and
electroencephalography compared with neuropsychological findings in systemic lupus
erythematosus. J Neurol 246:706–711
27. Sibbitt WL, Sibbitt RR (1993) Magnetic resonance spectroscopy and positron emission
tomography scanning in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus. Rheum Dis Clin
North Am 19:851–868
28. Sibbitt WL, Haseler LJ, Griffey RH, Hart BL,
Sibbitt RR, Matwiyoff NA (1994) Analysis of
cerebral structural changes in systemic lupus
erythematosus by proton MR spectroscopy.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 15:923–928
29. Jennekens FG, Kater L (2002) The central
nervous system in systemic lupus erythematosus. Part 2. Pathogenetic mechanisms of clinical syndromes: a literature investigation.
Rheumatology (Oxford) 41:619–630
30. McLean BN, Miller D, Thompson EJ (1995)
Oligoclonal banding of IgG in CSF, blood–
brain barrier function, and MRI findings in
patients with sarcoidosis, systemic lupus

294

B. Sakić

erythematosus, and Behcet’s disease involving
the nervous system. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 58:548–554
31. Hirohata S, Hirose S, Miyamoto T (1985)
Cerebrospinal fluid IgM, IgA, and IgG
indexes in systemic lupus erythematosus.
Their use as estimates of central nervous system disease activity. Arch Intern Med 145:
1843–1846
32. Winfield JB, Shaw M, Silverman LM,
Eisenberg RA, Wilson HA III, Koffler D
(1983) Intrathecal IgG synthesis and blood–
brain barrier impairment in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and central
nervous system dysfunction. Am J Med 74:
837–844
33. Yoshio T, Hirata D, Onda K, Nara H, Minota
S (2005) Antiribosomal P protein antibodies
in cerebrospinal fluid are associated with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus. J
Rheumatol 32:34–39
34. Greenwood DL, Gitlits VM, Alderuccio F,
Sentry JW, Toh BH (2002) Autoantibodies in
neuropsychiatric lupus. Autoimmunity 35:
79–86
35. Henn FA, McKinney WT (1987) Animal
models in psychiatry. In: Meltzer HY (ed)
Psychopharmacology: the third generation of
progress. Raven, New York, pp 687–695
36. Dixon FJ, Andrews BS, Eisenberg RA,
McConahey PJ, Theofilopoulos AN, Wilson
CB (1978) Etiology and pathogenesis of a
spontaneous lupus-like syndrome in mice.
Arthritis Rheum 21:S64–S67
37. Szechtman H, Sakić B, Denburg JA (1997)
Behaviour of MRL mice: an animal model of
disturbed behaviour in systemic autoimmune
disease. Lupus 6:223–229
38. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Denburg JA (1997)
Neurobehavioral alteration in autoimmune
mice. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 21:327–340
39. Alexander JJ, Quigg RJ (2007) Systemic
lupus erythematosus and the brain: what mice
are telling us. Neurochem Int 50:5–11
40. Sherman GF, Galaburda AM, Behan PO,
Rosen GD (1987) Neuroanatomical anomalies in autoimmune mice. Acta Neuropathol
(Berl) 74:239–242
41. Theofilopoulos AN (1992) Murine models of
lupus. In: Lahita RG (ed) Systemic lupus erythematosus, 2nd edn. Churchill Livingstone,
New York, pp 121–194
42. Andrews BS, Eisenberg RA, Theofilopoulos AN,
Izui S, Wilson CB, McConahey PJ, Murphy ED,
Roths JB, Dixon FJ (1978) Spontaneous
murine lupus-like syndromes. Clinical and
immunopathological manifestations in several
strains. J Exp Med 148:1198–1215

43. Gulinello M, Putterman C (2011) The MRL/
lpr mouse strain as a model for neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus. J Biomed
Biotechnol 2011:207504
44. Watanabe-Fukunaga R, Brannan CI, Copeland
NG, Jenkins NA, Nagata S (1992)
Lymphoproliferation disorder in mice
explained by defects in Fas antigen that mediates apoptosis. Nature 356:314–317
45. Nagata S (1994) Mutations in the Fas antigen
gene in lpr mice. Semin Immunol 6:3–8
46. Singer GG, Carrera AC, Marshakrothstein A,
Martineza C, Abbas AK (1994) Apoptosis, fas
and systemic autoimmunity: the MRL-Ipr/
Ipr model. Curr Opin Immunol 6:913–920
47. Park C, Sakamaki K, Tachibana O,
Yamashima T, Yamashita J, Yonehara S
(1998) Expression of Fas antigen in the normal mouse brain. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 252:623–628
48. Sakić B, Kolb B, Whishaw IQ, Gorny G,
Szechtman H, Denburg JA (2000)
Immunosuppression prevents neuronal atrophy in lupus-prone mice: evidence for brain
damage induced by autoimmune disease? J
Neuroimmunol 111:93–101
49. Sakić B, Denburg JA, Denburg SD, Szechtman
H (1996) Blunted sensitivity to sucrose in
autoimmune MRL-lpr mice: a curve-shift
study. Brain Res Bull 41:305–311
50. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Denburg SD, Denburg
JA (1995) Immunosuppressive treatment
prevents behavioral deficit in autoimmune
MRL-lpr mice. Physiol Behav 58:797–802
51. Ballok DA, Woulfe J, Sur M, Cyr M, Sakić B
(2004) Hippocampal damage in mouse and
human forms of systemic autoimmune disease. Hippocampus 14:649–661
52. Williams S, Sakić B, Hoffman SA (2010)
Circulating brain-reactive autoantibodies and
behavioral deficits in the MRL model of CNS
lupus. J Neuroimmunol 218:73–82
53. Ballok DA (2007) Neuroimmunopathology
in a murine model of neuropsychiatric lupus.
Brain Res Rev 54:67–79
54. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Talangbayan H,
Denburg SD, Carbotte RM, Denburg JA
(1994) Disturbed emotionality in autoimmune
MRL-lpr mice. Physiol Behav 56:609–617
55. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Talangbayan H,
Denburg S, Carbotte R, Denburg JA (1994)
Behavior and immune status of MRL mice in
the postweaning period. Brain Behav Immun
8:1–13
56. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Keffer M, Talangbayan
H, Stead R, Denburg JA (1992) A behavioral
profile of autoimmune lupus-prone MRL
mice. Brain Behav Immun 6:265–285

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

57. Ballok DA, Szechtman H, Sakić B (2003)
Taste responsiveness and diet preference in
autoimmune MRL mice. Behav Brain Res
140:119–130
58. Sakić B, Gurunlian L, Denburg SD (1998)
Reduced aggressiveness and low testosterone
levels in autoimmune MRL-lpr males. Physiol
Behav 63:305–309
59. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Denburg SD, Carbotte
RM, Denburg JA (1993) Spatial learning during the course of autoimmune disease in MRL
mice. Behav Brain Res 54:57–66
60. Hess DC, Taormina M, Thompson J, Sethi
KD, Diamond B, Rao R, Feldman DS (1993)
Cognitive and neurologic deficits in the
MRL/lpr mouse: a clinicopathologic study. J
Rheumatol 20:610–617
61. Brey RL, Amato AA, Kagan-Hallet K, Rhine
CB, Stallworth CL (1997) Anti-intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) antibody
treatment prevents central and peripheral nervous system disease in autoimmune-prone
mice. Lupus 6:645–651
62. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Stead R, Denburg JA
(1996) Joint pathology and behavioral performance in autoimmune MRL-lpr mice.
Physiol Behav 60:901–905
63. Abbott NJ, Mendonca LL, Dolman DE
(2003) The blood–brain barrier in systemic
lupus erythematosus. Lupus 12:908–915
64. Diamond B (2010) Antibodies and the brain:
lessons from lupus. J Immunol 185:
2637–2640
65. Vogelweid CM, Johnson GC, Besch-Williford
CL, Basler J, Walker SE (1991) Inflammatory
central nervous system disease in lupus-prone
MRL/lpr mice: comparative histologic and
immunohistochemical findings. J Neuroimmunol 35:89–99
66. Sidor MM, Sakić B, Malinowski PM, Ballok
DA, Oleschuk CJ, Macri J (2005) Elevated
immunoglobulin levels in the cerebrospinal
fluid from lupus-prone mice. J Neuroimmunol
165:104–113
67. Alexander EL, Murphy ED, Roths JB,
Alexander GE (1983) Congenic autoimmune
murine models of central nervous system disease in connective tissue disorders. Ann
Neurol 14:242–248
68. Farrell M, Sakić B, Szechtman H, Denburg JA
(1997) Effect of cyclophosphamide on leucocytic infiltration in the brain of MRL/lpr
mice. Lupus 6:268–274
69. Ma X, Foster J, Sakić B (2006) Distribution
and prevalence of leukocyte phenotypes in
brains of lupus-prone mice. J Neuroimmunol
179:26–36

295

70. McHale JF, Harari OA, Marshall D, Haskard
DO (1999) TNF-alpha and IL-1 sequentially
induce endothelial ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
expression in MRL/lpr lupus-prone mice. J
Immunol 163:3993–4000
71. Zameer A, Hoffman SA (2003) Increased
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression in the
brains of autoimmune mice. J Neuroimmunol
142:67–74
72. Tomita M, Holman BJ, Williams LS, Pang
KC, Santoro TJ (2001) Cerebellar dysfunction is associated with overexpression of
proinflammatory cytokine genes in lupus. J
Neurosci Res 64:26–33
73. Tomita M, Holman BJ, Santoro TJ (2001)
Aberrant cytokine gene expression in the hippocampus in murine systemic lupus erythematosus. Neurosci Lett 302:129–132
74. Alexander JJ, Jacob A, Bao L, Macdonald RL,
Quigg RJ (2005) Complement-dependent
apoptosis and inflammatory gene changes in
murine lupus cerebritis. J Immunol 175:
8312–8319
75. McIntyre KR, Ayer-LeLievre C, Persson H
(1990) Class II major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) gene expression in the
mouse brain is elevated in the autoimmune
MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr strain. J Neuroimmunol
28:39–52
76. Ballok DA, Ma X, Denburg JA, Arsenault L,
Sakić B (2006) Ibuprofen fails to prevent
brain pathology in a model of neuropsychiatric lupus. J Rheumatol 33:2199–2213
77. Ballok DA, Millward JM, Sakić B (2003)
Neurodegeneration in autoimmune MRL-lpr
mice as revealed by Fluoro Jade B staining.
Brain Res 964:200–210
78. Del Bigio MR (1993) Neuropathological
changes caused by hydrocephalus. Acta
Neuropathol 85:573–585
79. Gerber J, Raivich G, Wellmer A, Noeske C,
Kunst T, Werner A, Bruck W, Nau R (2001) A
mouse model of Streptococcus pneumoniae
meningitis mimicking several features of human
disease. Acta Neuropathol 101:499–508
80. Alexander EL, Alexander GE (1983) Aseptic
meningoencephalitis in primary Sjogren’s
syndrome. Neurology 33:593–598
81. Auer RN, Wieloch T, Olsson Y, Siesjo BK
(1984) The distribution of hypoglycemic
brain damage. Acta Neuropathol 64:177–191
82. Fujioka M, Okuchi K, Hiramatsu KI, Sakaki
T, Sakaguchi S, Ishii Y (1997) Specific changes
in human brain after hypoglycemic injury.
Stroke 28:584–587
83. Denenberg VH, Sherman GF, Rosen GD,
Morrison L, Behan PO, Galaburda AM

296

B. Sakić

(1992) A behavior profile of the MRL/Mp
lpr/lpr mouse and its association with hydrocephalus. Brain Behav Immun 6:40–49
84. Alexander JJ, Zwingmann C, Quigg R (2005)
MRL/lpr mice have alterations in brain metabolism as shown with ((1)H-(13)C) NMR
spectroscopy. Neurochem Int 47:143–151
85. Alexander JJ, Bao L, Jacob A, Kraus DM,
Holers VM, Quigg RJ (2003) Administration
of the soluble complement inhibitor, Crry-Ig,
reduces inflammation and aquaporin 4 expression in lupus cerebritis. Biochim Biophys Acta
1639:169–176
86. Hampton DW, Seitz A, Chen P, Heber-Katz
E, Fawcett JW (2004) Altered CNS response
to injury in the MRL/MpJ mouse.
Neuroscience 127:821–832
87. Lawson LJ, Perry VH, Dri P, Gordon S
(1990) Heterogeneity in the distribution and
morphology of microglia in the normal adult
mouse brain. Neuroscience 39:151–170
88. Ballok DA, Earls AM, Krasnik C, Hoffman
SA, Sakić B (2004) Autoimmune-induced
damage of the midbrain dopaminergic system
in lupus-prone mice. J Neuroimmunol 152:
83–97
89. Hess DC (1997) Cerebral lupus vasculopathy.
Mechanisms and clinical relevance. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 823:154–168
90. Baraczka K, Nekam K, Pozsonyi T, Jakab L,
Szongoth M, Sesztak M (2001) Concentration
of soluble adhesion molecules (sVCAM-1,
sICAM-1 and sL-selectin) in the cerebrospinal fluid and serum of patients with multiple
sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus
with
central
nervous
involvement.
Neuroimmunomodulation 9:49–54
91. Chinn RJS, Wilkinson ID, Hallcraggs MA,
Paley MNJ, Shorthall E, Carter S, Kendall
BE, Isenberg DA, Newman SP, Harrison
MJG (1997) Magnetic resonance imaging of
the brain and cerebral proton spectroscopy in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
Arthritis Rheum 40:36–46
92. Rocca MA, Agosta F, Mezzapesa DM,
Ciboddo G, Falini A, Comi G, Filippi M
(2006) An fMRI study of the motor system in
patients with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus. Neuroimage 30:478–484
93. Sled JG, Spring S, van Eede M, Lerch JP,
Ullal S, Sakić B (2009) Time course and
nature of brain atrophy in the MRL mouse
model of central nervous system lupus.
Arthritis Rheum 60:1764–1774
94. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Denburg JA, Gorny
G, Kolb B, Whishaw IQ (1998) Progressive
atrophy of pyramidal neuron dendrites in

autoimmune MRL-lpr mice. J Neuroimmunol
87:162–170
95. Maric D, Millward JM, Ballok DA, Szechtman
H, Barker JL, Denburg JA, Sakić B (2001)
Neurotoxic properties of cerebrospinal fluid
from behaviorally impaired autoimmune
mice. Brain Res 920:183–193
96. Kovac AD, Grammig J, Mahlo J, Steiner B,
Roth K, Nitsch R, Bechmann I (2002)
Comparison of neuronal density and subfield
sizes in the hippocampus of CD95L-deficient
(gld), CD95-deficient (lpr) and nondeficient
mice. Eur J Neurosci 16:159–163
97. Sakić B, Maric I, Koeberle PD, Millward JM,
Szechtman H, Maric D, Denburg JA (2000)
Increased TUNEL-staining in brains of autoimmune Fas-deficient mice. J Neuroimmunol
104:147–154
98. Yamashita T, Ninomiya M, Hernandez AP,
Garcia-Verdugo JM, Sunabori T, Sakaguchi
M, Adachi K, Kojima T, Hirota Y, Kawase T,
Araki N, Abe K, Okano H, Sawamoto K
(2006) Subventricular zone-derived neuroblasts migrate and differentiate into mature
neurons in the post-stroke adult striatum.
J Neurosci 26:6627–6636
99. Sakić B, Kirkham DL, Ballok DA, Mwanjewe
J, Fearon IM, Macri J, Yu G, Sidor MM,
Denburg JA, Szechtman H, Lau J, Ball AK,
Doering LC (2005) Proliferating brain cells
are a target of neurotoxic CSF in systemic
autoimmune disease. J Neuroimmunol 169:
68–85
100. Lechner O, Dietrich H, Oliveira dos SA,
Wiegers GJ, Schwarz S, Harbutz M, Herold
M, Wick G (2000) Altered circadian rhythms
of the stress hormone and melatonin response
in lupus-prone MRL/MP-fas(Ipr) mice.
J Autoimmun 14:325–333
101. Mirescu C, Gould E (2006) Stress and adult
neurogenesis. Hippocampus 16:233–238
102. Anderson KK, Ballok DA, Prasad N,
Szechtman H, Sakić B (2006) Impaired
response to amphetamine and neuronal
degeneration in the nucleus accumbens of
autoimmune MRL-lpr mice. Behav Brain Res
166:32–38
103. Brey RL, Cote S, Barohn R, Jackson C,
Crawley R, Teale JM (1995) Model for the
neuromuscular complications of systemic
lupus erythematosus. Lupus 4:209–212
104. Loheswaran G, Stanojcic M, Xu L, Sakić B
(2010) Autoimmunity as a principal pathogenic
factor in the refined model of neuropsychiatric
lupus. Clin Exp Neuroimmunol 1:141–152
105. How A, Dent PB, Liao SK, Denburg JA
(1985) Antineuronal antibodies in neuropsy-

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

chiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
Arthritis Rheum 28:789–795
106. Williams GW, Bluestein HG, Steinberg AD
(1981) Brain-reactive lymphocytotoxic antibody in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus: correlation
with central nervous system involvement. Clin
Immunol Immunopathol 18:126–132
107. Bluestein HG, Zvaifler NJ (1976) Brainreactive lymphocytotoxic antibodies in the
serum of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Clin Invest 57:509–516
108. Bresnihan B, Hohmeister R, Cutting J,
Travers RL, Waldburger M, Black C, Jones T,
Hughes GR (1979) The neuropsychiatric disorder in systemic lupus erythematosus: evidence for both vascular and immune
mechanisms. Ann Rheum Dis 38:301–306
109. Golombek SJ, Graus F, Elkon KB (1986)
Autoantibodies in the cerebrospinal fluid of
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
Arthritis Rheum 29:1090–1097
110. Quismorio FP, Friou GJ (1972) Antibodies
reactive with neurons in SLE patients with
neuropsychiatric manifestations. Int Arch
Allergy Appl Immunol 43:740–748
111. DeGiorgio LA, Konstantinov KN, Lee SC,
Hardin JA, Volpe BT, Diamond B (2001) A
subset of lupus anti-DNA antibodies crossreacts with the NR2 glutamate receptor in
systemic lupus erythematosus. Nat Med 7:
1189–1193
112. Tanaka S, Matsunaga H, Kimura M, Tatsumi K,
Hidaka Y, Takano T, Uema T, Takeda M,
Amino N (2003) Autoantibodies against four
kinds of neurotransmitter receptors in psychiatric disorders. J Neuroimmunol 141:155–164
113. Zandman-Goddard G, Chapman J, Shoenfeld
Y (2007) Autoantibodies involved in neuropsychiatric SLE and antiphospholipid syndrome. Semin Arthritis Rheum 36:297–315
114. Isshi K, Hirohata S (1996) Association of
anti-ribosomal P protein antibodies with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
Arthritis Rheum 39:1483–1490
115. Denburg SD, Denburg JA (2003) Cognitive
dysfunction and antiphospholipid antibodies
in systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus 12:
883–890
116. Hanly JG, Urowitz MB, Siannis F, Farewell
V, Gordon C, Bae SC, Isenberg D, Dooley
MA, Clarke A, Bernatsky S, Gladman D,
Fortin PR, Manzi S, Steinsson K, Bruce IN,
Ginzler E, Aranow C, Wallace DJ, RamseyGoldman R, van VR, Sturfelt G, Nived O,
Sanchez-Guerrero J, Alarcon GS, Petri M,
Khamashta M, Zoma A, Font J, Font J,
Kalunian K, Douglas J, Qi Q, Thompson K,

297

Merrill JT (2008) Autoantibodies and neuropsychiatric events at the time of systemic
lupus erythematosus diagnosis: results from
an international inception cohort study.
Arthritis Rheum 58:843–853
117. Kowal C, DeGiorgio LA, Nakaoka T,
Hetherington H, Huerta PT, Diamond B,
Volpe BT (2004) Cognition and immunity;
antibody impairs memory. Immunity 21:
179–188
118. Huerta PT, Kowal C, DeGiorgio LA, Volpe
BT, Diamond B (2006) Immunity and behavior: antibodies alter emotion. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 103:678–683
119. Kowal C, DeGiorgio LA, Lee JY, Edgar MA,
Huerta PT, Volpe BT, Diamond B (2006)
Human lupus autoantibodies against NMDA
receptors mediate cognitive impairment. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:19854–19859
120. Ndhlovu M, Preuss BE, Dengjel J, Stevanovic
S, Weiner SM, Klein R (2011) Identification
of alpha-tubulin as an autoantigen recognized
by sera from patients with neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus. Brain Behav
Immun 25:279–285
121. Colasanti T, Delunardo F, Margutti P,
Vacirca D, Piro E, Siracusano A, Ortona E
(2009) Autoantibodies involved in neuropsychiatric manifestations associated with systemic lupus erythematosus. J Neuroimmunol
212:3–9
122. Lefranc D, Launay D, Dubucquoi S, de SJ,
Dussart P, Vermersch M, Hachulla E,
Hatron PY, Vermersch P, Mouthon L, Prin L
(2007) Characterization of discriminant
human brain antigenic targets in neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus using an
immunoproteomic approach. Arthritis Rheum
56:3420–3432
123. Williams RC Jr, Sugiura K, Tan EM (2004)
Antibodies to microtubule-associated protein
2 in patients with neuropsychiatric systemic
lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 50:
1239–1247
124. Yoshio T, Onda K, Nara H, Minota S (2006)
Association of IgG anti-NR2 glutamate receptor antibodies in cerebrospinal fluid with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus.
Arthritis Rheum 54:675–678
125. Arinuma Y, Yanagida T, Hirohata S (2008)
Association of cerebrospinal fluid anti-NR2
glutamate receptor antibodies with diffuse
neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 58:1130–1135
126. Stanojcic M, Loheswaran G, Xu L, Hoffman
SA, Sakić B (2010) Intrathecal antibodies and
brain damage in autoimmune MRL mice.
Brain Behav Immun 24:289–297

298

B. Sakić

127. Hoffman SA, Madsen CS (1990) Brain
specific autoantibodies in murine models
of systemic lupus erythematosus. J
Neuroimmunol 30:229–237
128. Hoffman SA, Arbogast DN, Ford PM,
Shucard DW, Harbeck RJ (1987) Brain-reactive
autoantibody levels in the sera of ageing autoimmune mice. Clin Exp Immunol 70:74–83
129. Crimando J, Hoffman SA (1992) Detection
of brain-reactive autoantibodies in the sera of
autoimmune mice using ELISA. J Immunol
Methods 149:87–95
130. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Denburg SD, Carbotte
RM, Denburg JA (1993) Brain-reactive antibodies and behavior of autoimmune MRL-lpr
mice. Physiol Behav 54:1025–1029
131. Gao HX, Sanders E, Tieng AT, Putterman C
(2010) Sex and autoantibody titers determine
the development of neuropsychiatric manifestations in lupus-prone mice. J Neuroimmunol
229:112–122
132. Gao HX, Campbell SR, Cui MH, Zong P,
Hee-Hwang J, Gulinello M, Putterman C
(2009) Depression is an early disease manifestation in lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice. J
Neuroimmunol 207:45–56
133. Hoffman SA, Sakić B (2008) Autoimmunity
and brain dysfunction. In: Zalcman S, Siegel
A (eds) The neuroimmunological basis of
behavior and mental disorders. Springer,
New York
134. Meroni PL, Tincani A, Sepp N, Raschi E,
Testoni C, Corsini E, Cavazzana I, Pellegrini
S, Salmaggi A (2003) Endothelium and the
brain in CNS lupus. Lupus 12:919–928
135. Tang B, Matsuda T, Akira S, Nagata N,
Ikehara S, Hirano T, Kishimoto T (1991)
Age-associated increase in interleukin 6 in
MRL/lpr mice. Int Immunol 3:273–278
136. Singh AK, Lebedeva TV (1994) Interleukin-1
contributes to high level IgG production in
the murine MRL/lpr lupus model. Immunol
Invest 23:281–292
137. Boswell JM, Yui MA, Endres S, Burt DW,
Kelley VE (1988) Novel and enhanced IL-1
gene expression in autoimmune mice with
lupus. J Immunol 141:118–124
138. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Braciak TA, Richards
CD, Gauldie J, Denburg JA (1997) Reduced
preference for sucrose in autoimmune mice: a
possible role of interleukin-6. Brain Res Bull
44:155–165
139. Kwant A, Sakić B (2004) Behavioral effects of
infection with interferon-gamma adenovector. Behav Brain Res 151:73–82
140. Sakić B, Szechtman H, Gauldie J, Denburg JA
(2001) Behavioral effects of infection with IL-6
adenovector. Brain Behav Immun 15:25–42

141. Marshall D, Dangerfield JP, Bhatia VK, Larbi
KY, Nourshargh S, Haskard DO (2003)
MRL/lpr lupus-prone mice show exaggerated ICAM-1-dependent leucocyte adhesion
and transendothelial migration in response to
TNF-alpha. Rheumatology (Oxford) 42:
929–934
142. Banks WA, Kastin AJ, Gutierrez EG (1994)
Penetration of interleukin-6 across the murine
blood–brain barrier. Neurosci Lett 179:53–56
143. Banks WA, Kastin AJ, Gutierrez EG (1993)
Interleukin-1 alpha in blood has direct access to
cortical brain cells. Neurosci Lett 163:41–44
144. Gutierrez EG, Banks WA, Kastin AJ (1993)
Murine tumor necrosis factor alpha is transported from blood to brain in the mouse.
J Neuroimmunol 47:169–176
145. Tsai CY, Wu TH, Tsai ST, Chen KH, Thajeb
P, Lin WM, Yu HS, Yu CL (1994)
Cerebrospinal fluid interleukin-6, prostaglandin E2 and autoantibodies in patients with
neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus and central nervous system infections.
Scand J Rheumatol 23:57–63
146. Svenungsson E, Andersson M, Brundin L,
van Vollenhoven R, Khademi M, Tarkowski
A, Greitz D, Dahlstrom M, Lundberg I,
Klareskog L, Olsson T (2001) Increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric
oxide metabolites in neuropsychiatric lupus
erythematosus. Ann Rheum Dis 60:372–379
147. Hayley S, Merali Z, Anisman H (2003) Stress
and cytokine-elicited neuroendocrine and
neurotransmitter sensitization: implications
for depressive illness. Stress 6:19–32
148. Hu Y, Dietrich H, Herold M, Heinrich PC,
Wick G (1993) Disturbed immuno-endocrine
communication via the hypothalamo- pituitary-adrenal axis in autoimmune disease. Int
Arch Allergy Immunol 102:232–241
149. Rivier C, Rivest S (1993) Mechanisms mediating the effects of cytokines on neuroendocrine
functions in the rat. In: Chadwick D, Marsh J,
Ackrill K (eds) Corticotropin-releasing factor.
Wiley, Chichester, pp 204–225
150. Spangelo BL, Gorospe WC (1995) Role of
the cytokines in the neuroendocrine-immune
system axis. Front Neuroendocrinol 16:1–22
151. Miller AH, Maletic V, Raison CL (2009)
Inflammation and its discontents: the role of
cytokines in the pathophysiology of major
depression. Biol Psychiatry 65:732–741
152. Del Rey A, Besedovsky HO (2000) The
cytokine-HPA axis circuit contributes to
prevent or moderate autoimmune processes,
Z Rheumatol 59(suppl 2):II/31–II/35
153. Lorton D, Lubahn C, Bellinger DL (2003)
Potential use of drugs that target neural-

14

The MRL Model: An Invaluable Tool in Studies of Autoimmunity–Brain Interactions

immune pathways in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases.
Curr Drug Targets Inflamm Allergy 2:1–30
154. Spangelo BL, Judd AM, Call GB, Zumwalt J,
Gorospe WC (1995) Role of the cytokines in
the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
and
gonadal axes. Neuroimmunomodulation 2:
299–312
155. Spangelo BL, Judd AM, Isakson PC, MacLeod
RM (1989) Interleukin-6 stimulates anterior
pituitary hormone release in vitro.
Endocrinology 125:575–577
156. Shanks N, Moore PM, Perks P, Lightman SL
(1999) Alterations in hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal function correlated with the onset of
murine SLE in MRL +/+ and lpr/lpr mice.
Brain Behav Immun 13:348–360
157. Sakić B, Laflamme N, Crnic LS, Szechtman
H, Denburg JA, Rivest S (1999) Reduced
corticotropin-releasing factor and enhanced
vasopressin gene expression in brains of mice
with autoimmunity-induced behavioral dysfunction. J Neuroimmunol 96:80–91
158. McEwen BS (1999) Stress and the aging hippocampus. Front Neuroendocrinol 20:49–70
159. Woolley CS, Gould E, McEwen BS (1990)
Exposure to excess glucocorticoids alters dendritic morphology of adult hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Brain Res 531:225–231
160. Ballok DA, Sakić B (2008) Purine receptor
antagonist modulates serology and affective
behaviors in lupus-prone mice: Evidence of
autoimmune-induced pain? Brain Behav
Immun 22(8):1208–1216
161. Sapolsky RM (2000) Glucocorticoids and
hippocampal atrophy in neuropsychiatric disorders. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:925–935
162. Peress NS, Roxburgh VA, Gelfand MC (1981)
Binding sites for immune components in
human choroid plexus. Arthritis Rheum 24:
520–526

299

163. Schwartz MM, Roberts JL (1983)
Membranous and vascular choroidopathy:
two patterns of immune deposits in systemic
lupus
erythematosus.
Clin
Immunol
Immunopathol 29:369–380
164. Reilly CM, Oates JC, Cook JA, Morrow JD,
Halushka PV, Gilkeson GS (2000) Inhibition
of mesangial cell nitric oxide in MRL/lpr
mice by prostaglandin J2 and proliferator
activation receptor-gamma agonists. J
Immunol 164:1498–1504
165. O’Sullivan
FX,
Vogelweid
CM,
Beschwilliford CL, Walker SE (1995)
Differential effects of CD4(+) T cell depletion on inflammatory central nervous system
disease, arthritis and sialadenitis in MRL/lpr
mice. J Autoimmun 8:163–175
166. Jacob A, Hack B, Bai T, Brorson JR, Quigg
RJ, Alexander JJ (2010) Inhibition of C5a
receptor alleviates experimental CNS lupus.
J Neuroimmunol 221:46–52
167. Sakić B, Lacosta S, Denburg J, Szechtman H
(2002) Altered neurotransmission in brains of
autoimmune mice: pharmacological and neurochemical evidence. J Neuroimmunol 129:
84–96
168. Chun S, McEvilly R, Foster JA, Sakić B
(2008) Proclivity to self-injurious behavior in
MRL-lpr mice: implications for autoimmunity-induced damage in the dopaminergic
system. Mol Psychiatry 13:1043–1053
169. Stanojcic M, Burstyn-Cohen T, Nashi N,
Lemke G, Sakić B (2009) Disturbed distribution of proliferative brain cells during lupuslike disease. Brain Behav Immun 23(7):
1003–1013
170. Lee JY, Huerta PT, Zhang J, Kowal C,
Bertini E, Volpe BT, Diamond B (2009)
Neurotoxic autoantibodies mediate congenital cortical impairment of offspring in maternal lupus. Nat Med 15:91–96

Chapter 15
Interleukin-2 and the Brain: Dissecting Central Versus
Peripheral Contributions Using Unique Mouse Models
John M. Petitto, Danielle Meola, and Zhi Huang
Abstract
Although many studies have documented peripheral immune alterations in patients with psychiatric and
neurological disorders, almost all these data in humans are correlative. The actions of IL-2 on neurodevelopment, function, and disease are the result of both IL-2’s actions in the peripheral immune system and
intrinsic actions in the CNS. Determining if, and under what conditions (e.g., development, acute injury)
these different actions of IL-2 are operative in the brain is essential to make advances in understanding the
multifaceted affects of IL-2 on CNS function and disease. Mouse models have provided ways to obtain
new insights into how the complex biology of a cytokine such as IL-2 can have simultaneous, dynamic
effects on multiple systems (e.g., regulating homeostasis in the brain and immune system, autoimmunity
that can affect both systems). Here we describe some of the relevant literature and our research using different mouse models. This includes models such as congenic IL-2 knockout mice bred on immunodeficient
backgrounds coupled with immune reconstitution strategies used to dissect neuroimmunological processes
involved in the development of septohippocampal pathology, and test the hypothesis that dysregulation of
the brain’s endogenous neuroimmunological milieu may occur with the loss of brain IL-2 gene expression
and be involved in initiating CNS autoimmunity. Use of animal models like these in the field of psychoneuroimmunology may lead to critical advances into our understanding of the role of brain cytokines and
autoimmunity in neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), neurodevelopmental disorder
(e.g., autism, schizophrenia), and autoimmune diseases including multiple sclerosis.
Key words: Cytokines, Chemokines, Neuroimmunology, Congenic mice, Knockout mice,
Immunodeficient mice, T cells, Autoimmunity, Neurological diseases, Neuromedicine

1. Introduction:
Cytokines and the
Brain

Landmark research by Zalcman et al. (1) provided some of the first
evidence of the selective actions of brain cytokines, refuting the
commonly held view at the time that cytokines acting in the brain
had redundant functional properties mirroring their actions in
the peripheral immune system. This work and others complemented groundbreaking findings that lymphocytes could secrete

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_15, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

301

302

J.M. Petitto et al.

classic neuropeptides and that peripheral immunization signaled
hypothalamic neurons (2, 3). These and other studies in psychoneuroimmunology laid the foundation for multidisciplinary research
that sought to identify the mechanisms whereby different cytokines
may modulate complex neurobiological processes (e.g., complex
domains of behaviors such as learning and memory).
In the CNS, many cytokines and cytokine receptors are synthesized by endogenous brain cells, and frequently exhibit neuromodulatory and neurotrophic effects that are limited to specific neural
pathways. Cytokines derived from peripheral immune cells (and in
some cases perhaps other tissues) do not readily cross the blood–
brain barrier. The mechanisms of cytokine transport vary for different cytokines (e.g., active vs. passive transport) as does the degree
to which they enter the CNS (4). Goehler et al. (5) have described
how the area postrema acts as an anatomical “interface” between
the peripheral immune system and the brain. Afferent sensory
fibers of the vagus can carry signals initiated by interleukin-1 to
brainstem areas (e.g., nucleus tractus solitarius), and vagal sensory
activation may occur during infection and provide input to the
brain and modify behavior (6, 7). Whether, and how, other cytokines signal the CNS via the vagus or other afferent nerves in the
periphery that allow animals to adapt to their environment is
unknown and could be an important avenue of research.
Cytokine receptors are typically more readily detectable in the
brain than cytokines themselves. It appears that cytokines frequency
have more general effects on the brain’s endogenous immune-like
cells (e.g., microglia). It has proved much more challenging to
unequivocally detect cytokines and cytokine receptors using immunohistocytochemistry (or to reliably detect cytokine receptors
using radioligand receptor binding or autoradiography) (8).
Receptors for IL-1R (9), IL-1R antagonist (10), and IL-6R (11),
for example, are also detectable in the rodent dentate gyrus by in
situ hybridization. Gene expression for IL-2 receptors has been
found throughout CA1–CA4 of the hippocampus and dentate
gyrus (8, 12–14). Thus, receptors for these cytokines in the hippocampus place them in a position to influence learning and memory and other related behaviors, and some of these same cytokines
that have been found to target receptors in the hippocampus have
the capacity to modulate neurobiological processes known to
mediate these behaviors. The neuroimmunology of cognition has
received considerable attention. Hippocampal long-term potentiation (LTP), an important neurobiological mechanism involved in
learning and memory storage, is modulated by several cytokines
(15). IL-1 mRNA and protein have been found to be increased in
the hippocampus following some forms of peripheral immune system activation such as occurs following LPS administration (16),
and learning and memory performance deficits induced by systemic administration of LPS can be antagonized by antibody to

15

Interleukin-2 and the Brain…

303

IL-1β (17). This is one mechanism by which pyrogens are known
to induce sickness behavior (e.g., fever, decreased activity and
exploration, reduced social interaction, depressive signs and symptoms) that impairs cognitive performance (18, 19). IL-1 is the
most widely studied cytokine involved in learning and memory,
and I.C.V. administration of IL-1β, for example, impaired contextual fear conditioning but did not change auditory-cue fear conditioning—a form of conditioning that is not dependent on the
hippocampus (20).
The sections that follow focus on IL-2’s actions in the hippocampus and cognition, and particularly on our laboratory’s
research using an animal model to disentangle the complex actions
of peripheral and central IL-2 on brain development and autoimmunity. Some of the pathophysiology and neuropathology observed
in this model is reminiscent of abnormalities seen in certain neuropsychiatric disorders.

2. IL-2 and the
Brain: The
Septohippocampal
System and
Cognition

There is a large body of research indicating that IL-2 may be
involved in CNS development, normal brain physiology, and
homeostatic repair mechanisms, as well as brain dysfunction and
neurodegenerative processes. The initial clue that IL-2 had CNS
actions came from cancer patients where their behavior was found
to be altered after prolonged exposure. Treatment with IL-2
induced cognitive dysfunction and other untoward neuropsychiatric side effects at doses significantly above what would be considered physiological (21–23).
Depending on the methodology and conditions, the data suggest that microglia, astrocytes, and neurons can produce this
cytokine (24–27). In culture systems, IL-2 provides trophic support to neurons from the hippocampus and medial septum (28,
29), and enhances neurite branching (29, 30). It is noteworthy
that IL-2 has been shown to be one of the most potent modulators
of acetylcholine (ACh) release from rat hippocampal slices (31). In
hippocampal slices, IL-2 modulates acetylcholine in a dose-dependent biphasic manner, potentiating release at very low (fM) concentrations and inhibiting release at higher (nM) concentrations,
whereas by contrast, cholinergic interneurons in the striatum do
not respond to IL-2 (32). IL-2 gene expression and protein have
been identified in the CNS (24, 33). It is localized in discrete areas
of perfused normal rat forebrain including the septohippocampal
system and related limbic regions (12, 34), and is present in human
hippocampal tissue (35).
Preclinical studies in animals have substantiated the effects of
IL-2 on septohippocampal circuitry. As the hippocampus is essential

304

J.M. Petitto et al.

for spatial learning and memory consolidation, IL-2 appears to
alter memory processing via interactions with septohippocampal
cholinergic nerve terminals in the hippocampus (25) where it can
modify LTP (36) and various parameters of cognitive performance
in animals (26, 37–41). Aged mice were found to be particularly
vulnerable to repeated dosing of IL-2, exhibiting both memory
deficits and neuronal damage that was selective to the hippocampus (41). There are no studies, to our knowledge, that have systematically examined if elderly humans—such as those receiving
IL-2 immunotherapy for cancer treatment—are more vulnerable
to the effects of IL-2 than younger adults. Chronic dosing of
IL-2, however, has been shown by Anisman’s lab to disrupt the
working component of spatial memory in nonaged rats in the
Morris water-maze (40).
IL-2 has been implicated in the pathogenesis of several major
psychiatric and neurological disorders, including those that exhibit
neuropathological alterations of the septohippocampal system
(26). The predominant effects of IL-2 in the brain occur in the
hippocampal formation where receptors for this cytokine are
enriched (12–14, 25, 42). In postmortem hippocampi of
Alzheimer’s disease patients, IL-2 levels were found to be elevated
compared to controls (35).

3. Neurotrophic
Factors and
Septohippocampal
Cytoarchitecture
Are Altered by IL-2
Deficiency

Most findings are from in vitro studies, and to lesser degree, from
studies in animals where IL-2’s effects on various target behaviors
or functional neurobiological outcomes (e.g., LTP in vivo) are
used to make inferences about the action of the endogenous
cytokine. Although the literature has documented many actions of
IL-2 in the brain ranging from trophic actions on cultured neurons
to the modulation of neurotransmitters and behavior, virtually all
of these studies have used the strategy of administering exogenous
IL-2. Thus, one of the goals of our research has been to study IL-2
knockout mice to better understand the role of endogenous IL-2
on brain function.
Our lab’s research has shown that IL-2 gene deletion impaired
learning and memory performance, sensorimotor gating, and
resulted in reductions in hippocampal infrapyramidal (IP) mossy
fiber length in mice (43). Rodent models have shown that mossy
fiber length correlates positively with spatial learning ability in a
number of studies (44–46). We have found that IL-2 knockout
mice also have fewer IP granule cells (47). As IL-2 has been found
to have neurotrophic and neuromodulatory actions on hippocampal neurons in vitro, our data suggests that hippocampal IL-2
may provide trophic support for hippocampal neurons. Loss of or

15

Interleukin-2 and the Brain…

305

dysregulated brain IL-2 function may play a key role in altering
the ongoing increase in dentate granule cells during the first year
of life (48, 49) and effect the integrity of axons in the dentate
gyrus (50).
IL-2 knockout mice had significantly reduced concentrations
of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) protein and increased
concentrations of nerve growth factor (NGF) in the hippocampus
compared to wild-type littermates (where possible in our work, we
attempt to compare littermates so that intrauterine and postnatal
experience is controlled). Although our research had shown that
receptors for IL-2 are enriched in the hippocampus, including the
granule cell layer (GCL) of the dentate gyrus (DG) (13, 14), it
was unclear in the literature if IL-2’s trophic effects on neurons
in vitro (28–30) operate in vivo, or if IL-2 could modify the
expression of brain neurotrophic factors. In fact, we found that the
observed differences in the level of BDNF were consistent with
our hypothesis that we would find reductions in trophic factors
important to hippocampal development and maintenance. BDNF
plays a role in the maintenance and repair of septal cholinergic
neurons (51–53), and can implement a positive feedback mechanism with these neurons to enhance the release of acetylcholine
(54), and can also modulate postnatal neurogenesis (55, 56), thus
potentially impacting granule cell number. The mechanism of the
interaction between IL-2 gene deletion and the reduction of
BDNF levels remains unclear. Though BDNF is expressed in the
peripheral immune system by lymphocytes, IL-2 does not stimulate its production or release in these cells. IL-2 can, however,
upregulate the expression of TrkB, the receptor for BDNF, in lymphocytes (57). Furthermore, some evidence suggests that BDNF
can stimulate a positive feedback mechanism of its own via the
TrkB receptor in hippocampal neurons (58, 59). IL-2 deficiency
may therefore potentially lead to a downregulation of the TrkB
receptor, thereby partially inhibiting the positive feedback production of BDNF. Our data suggest that IL-2 may have direct and/or
indirect effects on BDNF.
Moderate lesions of rat septohippocampal projections have
been shown to result in increased expression of mRNA for NGF,
but not BDNF in hippocampal target cells (60). Opposite to the
aforementioned findings with BDNF, NGF protein levels were
actually increased in the IL-2 knockout mice. In keeping with our
observations of reduced medial septal cholinergic survival in IL-2
knockout mice (47, 61), it is possible that the hippocampal target
neurons in these animals may produce higher protein levels of
NGF as a compensatory response. Interestingly, the imbalance
that we see in IL-2 knockout mice between BDNF and NGF levels
(decreased BDNF and increased NGF concentrations) is also
found in the postmortem hippocampus of Alzheimer’s disease
brains (62).

306

J.M. Petitto et al.

4. IL-2 DeficiencyInduced
Autoimmunity and
the Brain: Changes
in the Brain’s
Neuroimmunological Milieu
Contributes to the
Development of
CNS Autoimmunity

A number of clinical syndromes and diseases affecting the CNS
have a putative link to autoimmunity; however, with the exception
of multiple sclerosis and myasthenia gravis, little is known about
specific factors and pathways that govern CNS autoimmunity. IL-2
has been implicated in the pathogenesis of CNS autoimmune disease, multiple sclerosis, as well as in schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s
disease (63–65). Research examining the actions of IL-2 in the
brain has focused almost exclusively on the cytokine’s neuromodulatory and neurotrophic properties; however until recently, it was
unknown if IL-2 deficiency results in the spontaneous development of CNS autoimmunity. In the immune system, IL-2 is indispensable for maintaining immunological homeostasis (e.g.,
self-tolerance, T regulatory cell development and function). It is
now known that IL-2 is essential for normal T regulatory cell function which is critical in self-tolerance (66). IL-2 deficiency in
knockout mice produces the spontaneous development of autoimmune disease affecting several organ systems (e.g., intestines, heart)
characterized by T cell infiltration, and in some organs autoantibody deposition as well (67–69).
We tested the hypothesis that IL-2 deficient mice develop a
unique form of autoimmunity that selectively targets septal cholinergic projection neurons. Autoimmune-mediated loss of brain septal cholinergic neurons has been found in animals immunized with
septal cholinergic hybrid cells (70). We had previously found that
choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)-positive neurons in the medial
septum/vertical diagonal band of Broca (MS/vDB) of IL-2 KO
and IL-2 WT littermates on the C57BL/6 background differed as
a function of age (47, 61). At 8–12 weeks of age IL-2 KO mice
show considerable evidence of peripheral autoimmunity (e.g.,
marked splenomegaly), whereas 3-week-old IL-2 KO mice do not
yet develop autoimmunity. We postulated that the selective loss of
septal cholinergic neurons in IL-2 KO mice (i.e., vs. no differences
compared to WT mice for ChAT-positive neurons in the striatum
or in GABAergic neurons in the MS/vDB) was due to autoimmune-mediated neurodegeneration that occurs postnatally between
weaning and early adulthood (development of the medial septum
is essentially complete by embryonic day 17 (71)). Thus, we
quantified CD3+ T cells in the septum, hippocampus, and
cerebellum of IL-2 KO and IL-2 WT mice at ages ranging from
2 to 14 weeks. T cells infiltrated the brains of IL-2 deficient mice,
but were not selective for the septum. Brain T lymphocyte levels
in IL-2 KO mice positively correlated with the degree of peripheral autoimmunity (72). We did not detect CD19+ B lymphocytes, IgG-positive lymphocytes, or IgG deposition indicative of
autoantibodies in the brains of IL-2 KO mice.

15

Interleukin-2 and the Brain…

307

Emerging data from our lab and others suggested that
dysregulation of the brain’s endogenous neuroimmunological
milieu may occur with the loss of brain IL-2 gene expression and
be involved in initiating processes that lead to CNS autoimmunity
(47, 72, 73). Therefore, in a recent study we sought to test our
working hypothesis that IL-2 deficiency induces endogenous
changes in the CNS that play a key role in eliciting T cell homing
into the brain (74). We used an experimental approach that combined mouse congenic breeding and immune reconstitution to test
this hypothesis. In congenic mice without brain IL-2 (two IL-2
KO alleles) that were reconstituted with a normal wild-type
immune system, the loss of brain IL-2 doubled the number of T
cells that trafficked into the brain in all regions quantified (hippocampus, septum, and cerebellum) compared to mice with two
wild-type brain IL-2 alleles and a wild-type peripheral immune system. We found that congenic mice with normal brain IL-2 (two
wild-type IL-2 alleles) that were immune reconstituted with autoreactive Treg-deficient T cells from IL-2 KO mice developed the
expected peripheral autoimmunity (splenomegaly) and had a comparable doubling of T cell trafficking into the hippocampus and
septum, whereas they exhibited an additional twofold proclivity for
the cerebellum over the septohippocampal regions. Unlike brain
trafficking of wild-type T cells, the increased homing of IL-2 KO T
cells to the cerebellum was independent of brain IL-2 gene expression. T cells selective for the cerebellum could shed light on putative autoimmune disease processes associated with cerebellar
pathology in certain neurological and neuropsychiatric disease
(e.g., autism). Our findings from this study show that brain IL-2
deficiency induces endogenous CNS changes that may lead to the
development of brain autoimmunity, and that autoreactive Tregdeficient IL-2 KO T cells trafficking to the brain could have a proclivity to induce cerebellar neuropathology.

5. Concluding
Remarks
Psychoneuroimmunology research described in this brief review
chapter indicates that IL-2 dysregulation in the brain and immune
system may play a role in neuropathology and disease in humans.
It is possible, for example, that early neurodevelopmental alterations associated with IL-2 dysregulation may account for
pathophysiological abnormalities seen decades later in the mature
brain of individuals with neurodevelopmental diseases such as
schizophrenia and autism. Considerable interest over several
decades has attempted to link prenatal viral infection and/or the
maternal immune response to such a putative agent that may serve
as an environmental trigger that elicits neuroimmunological and

308

J.M. Petitto et al.

neurobiological changes leading to the expression of schizophrenia
in individuals with genetic loading for the disorder. The normal
timing during which IL-2 may stimulate neuronal growth and
migration during early development may be modified by a developmental event like viral infection or birth trauma in a genetically
susceptible individual. In the hippocampus, where IL-2 receptors are enriched, this could contribute to the alterations in this
region such as the abnormal orientation of subsets of hippocampal neurons found in the postmortem brains of individuals with
schizophrenia.
Immunological disturbances in the peripheral immune system
during development could also contribute to abnormalities in neurodevelopment. Using animal models to determine when and
under what conditions (e.g., development, injury) these different
actions of IL-2 are operative in the brain may help to advance our
knowledge of the neuroimmunology of several major mental disorders. The role of autoimmunity in brain disease has been somewhat
elusive, with the exception of a few diseases. Despite a plethora of
published studies, almost all of this data in humans is correlative
and much of the basic research has understandably relied on simpler models (e.g., in vitro models). Thus, informative animal models such those described earlier may provide valuable new insight in
understanding how the complex biology of a cytokine like IL-2
can have simultaneous, dynamic effects on multiple systems (e.g.,
regulating homeostasis in the brain and immune system, autoimmunity that can affect both systems).
Models such as the congenic IL-2 knockout mice bred on
immunodeficient backgrounds coupled with immune reconstitution strategies can be valuable to test novel hypotheses such as our
postulation that changes in the brain’s endogenous neuroimmunological milieu that occur with the loss of brain IL-2 gene expression may be involved in initiating CNS autoimmunity. Thus,
further research using this approach may help to delineate further
the complexity of IL-2 biology in the brain and immune system.
Use of animal models like these in psychoneuroimmunology
research may advance our understanding of the role of brain cytokines and autoimmunity in neurodegenerative diseases (e.g.,
Alzheimer’s disease), neurodevelopmental diseases (e.g., autism,
schizophrenia), and autoimmune diseases including multiple
sclerosis.

Acknowledgements
Funding for this study was provided by NIH RO1 NS055018.

15

Interleukin-2 and the Brain…

309

References
1. Zalcman S, Green-Johnson JM, Murray L,
Nance DM, Dyck D, Anisman H, Greenberg
AH (1994) Cytokine-specific central monoamine alterations induced by interleukin-1, -2,
and -6. Brain Res 643:40–49
2. Besedovsky HO, Del Rey A, Klusman I,
Furukawa H, Monge Arditi G, Kabiersch A
(1991) Cytokines as modulators of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 40:613–618
3. Blalock JE (1994) The syntax of immune-neuroendocrine communications. Immunol Today
15:504–511
4. Pan W, Kastin AJ (1999) Penetration of neurotrophins and cytokines across the blood–
brain/blood–spinal cord barrier. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev 36:291–298
5. Goehler LE, Erisir A, Gaykema RP (2006)
Neural-immune interface in the rat area postrema. Neuroscience 140:1415–1434
6. Maier SF, Watkins LR (1998) Cytokines for
psychologists: implications of bidirectional
immune-to-brain communication for understanding behavior, mood and cognition.
Psychol Rev 105:83–107
7. Goehler LE, Lyte M, Gaykema RP (2007)
Infection-induced viscerosensory signals from
the gut enhance anxiety: implications for psychoneuroimmunology. Brain Behav Immun
21:721–726
8. Petitto JM, Huang Z (2001) Cloning the fulllength IL-2/15 receptor-β cDNA sequence
from mouse brain: evidence of enrichment in
hippocampal formation neurons. Regul Pept
98:77–87
9. Cunningham ETJ, Wada E, Carter DB, Tracey
DE, Battey JF, De Souza EB (1992) In situ histochemical localization of type I interleukin-1
receptor messenger RNA in the central nervous
system, pituitary, and adrenal gland of the
mouse. J Neurosci 12:1101–1114
10. Licinio J, Wong ML, Gold PW (1991) Localization
of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist mRNA in rat
brain. Endocrinology 129:562–564
11. Schobitz B, Voorhuis DA, De Kloet ER (1992)
Localization of interleukin-6 mRNA and interleukin-6 receptor mRNA in rat brain. Neurosci
Lett 136:189–192
12. Lapchak PA, Araujo DM, Quirion R, Beaudet
A (1991) Immunoautoradiographic localization of interleukin 2-like immunoreactivity and
interleukin 2 receptors (Tac antigen-like immunoreactivity) in the rat brain. Neuroscience 44:
173–184
13. Petitto JM, Huang Z (1994) Molecular cloning
of a partial cDNA of the interleukin-2 receptor-β
in normal mouse brain: in situ localization in the

hippocampus and expression by neuroblastoma
cells. Brain Res 650:140–145
14. Petitto JM, Huang Z, Raizada M, Rinker CM,
McCarthy DB (1998) Molecular cloning of the
cDNA coding sequence of IL-2 receptor-γ (γc)
from human and murine forebrain: expression
in the hippocampus in situ and by brain cells
in vitro. Mol Brain Res 53:152–162
15. Jankowsky J, Patterson P (1999) Cytokine and
growth factor involvement in long-term potentiation. Mol Cell Neurosci 14:273–286
16. Laye S, Parnet P, Goujon E, Dantzer R (1994)
Peripheral administration of lipopolysaccharide
induces the expression of cytokine transcripts
in the brain and pituitary of mice. Brain Res
Mol Brain Res 27:157–162
17. Gibertini M, Newton C, Klein TW, Friedman H
(1995) Legionella pneumophila-induced visual
learning impairment reversed by anti-interleukin-1 beta. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 210:7–11
18. Aubert A, Vega C, Dantzer R, Goodall G
(1995) Pyrogens specifically disrupt the acquisition of a task involving cognitive processing in
the rat. Brain Behav Immun 9:129–148
19. Dantzer R, Bluthe RM, Gheusi G, Cremona S,
Laye S, Parnet P, Kelley KW (1998) Molecular
basis of sickness behavior. Ann N Y Acad Sci
856:132–138
20. Pugh CR, Kumagawa K, Fleshner M, Watkins
LR, Maier SF, Rudy JW (1998) Selective effects
of peripheral lipopolysaccharide administration
on contextual and auditory-cue fear conditioning. Brain Behav Immun 3:212–229
21. Denicoff KD, Rubinow DR, Papa MZ, Simpson
C, Seipp CA, Lotze MT, Chang AE, Rosenstein
D, Rosenberg SA (1987) The neuropsychiatric
effects of treatment with interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells. Ann Intern Med
107:293–300
22. West WH, Tauer KW, Yannelli JR, Marshall GD,
Orr DW, Thurman GB, Oldham RK (1987)
Constant-infusion recombinant interleukin-2
in adoptive immunotherapy of advanced cancer. N Engl J Med 316:898–905
23. Capuron L, Ravaud A, Radat F, Dantzer R,
Goodall G (1998) Effects of interleukin-2
and alpha interferon cytokine immunotherapy on the mood and cognitive performance
of cancer patients. Neuroimmunomodulation
22:9
24. Eizenberg O, Faber-Elman A, Lotan M,
Schwartz M (1995) Interleukin-2 transcripts in
human and rodent brains: possible expression
by astrocytes. J Neurochem 64:1928–1936
25. Hanisch UK, Quirion R (1996) Interleukin-2
as a neuroregulatory cytokine. Brain Res Rev
21:246–284

310

J.M. Petitto et al.

26. Hanisch U, Neuhaus J, Rowe W, Van-Rossum D,
Möller T, Kettenmann H, Quirion R (1997)
Neurotoxic consequences of central long-term
administration of interleukin-2 in rats.
Neuroscience 79:799–818
27. Labuzek K, Kowalski J, Gabryel B, Herman ZS
(2005) Chlorpromazine and loxapine reduce
interleukin-1beta and interleukin-2 release by
rat mixed glial and microglial cell cultures. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 15:23–30
28. Awatsuji H, Furukawa Y, Nakajima M,
Furukawa S, Hayashi K (1993) Interleukin-2 as
a neurotrophic factor for supporting the survival of neurons cultured from various regions
of fetal rat brain. J Neurosci Res 35:305–311
29. Sarder M, Saito H, Abe K (1993) Interleukin-2
promotes survival and neurite extension of cultured neurons from fetal rat brain. Brain Res
625:347–350
30. Sarder M, Abe K, Saito H, Nishiyama N (1996)
Comparative effect of IL-2 and IL-6 on morphology of cultured hippocampal neurons from
fetal rat brain. Brain Res 715:9–16
31. Hanisch UK, Seto D, Quirion R (1993)
Modulation of hippocampal acetylcholine
release: a potent central action of interleukin-2.
J Neurosci 13:3368–3374
32. Seto D, Kar S, Quirion R (1997) Evidence for
direct and indirect mechanisms in the potent
modulatory action of interleukin-2 on the
release of acetylcholine in rat hippocampal
slices. Br J Pharmacol 120:1151–1157
33. Lapchak PA (1992) A role for interleukin-2 in
the regulation of striatal dopaminergic function. Neuroreport 3:165–168
34. Villemain F, Owens T, Renno T, Beaudet A
(1991) Localization of mRNA for interleukin-2
(IL-2) in mouse brain by in situ hybridization.
Soc Neurosci Abstr 17:1199
35. Araujo DM, Lapchak PA (1994) Induction of
immune system mediators in the hippocampal
formation in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases: selective effects on specific interleukins
and interleukin receptors. Neuroscience 61:
745–754
36. Tancredi V, Zona C, Velotti F, Eusebi F,
Santoni A (1990) Interleukin-2 suppresses
established long-term potentiation and inhibits
its induction in the rat hippocampus. Brain Res
525:149–151
37. Bianchi M, Panerai AE (1993) Interleukin-2
enhances scopolamine-induced amnesia and
hyperactivity in the mouse. Neuroreport 4:
1046–1048
38. Bianchi M, Ferrario P, Zonta N, Panerai AE
(1995) Effects of interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-2 on amino acids levels in mouse cortex
and hippocampus. Neuroreport 6:1689–1692

39. Mennicken F, Quirion R (1997) Interleukin-2
increases choline acetyltransferase activity in
septal-cell cultures. Synapse 26:175–183
40. Lacosta S, Merali Z, Anisman H (1999)
Influence of acute and repeated interleukin-2
administration on spatial learning, locomotor
activity, exploratory behaviors, and anxiety.
Behav Neurosci 113:1030–1041
41. Nemni R, Iannaccone S, Quattrini A, Smirne S,
Sessa M, Lodi M, Erminio C, Canal N (1992)
Effect of chronic treatment with recombinant
interleukin-2 on the central nervous system of
adult and old mice. Brain Res 591:248–252
42. Araujo DM, Lapchak PA, Collier B, Quirion R
(1989) Localization of interleukin-2 immunoreactivity and interleukin-2 receptors in the rat
brain: interaction with the cholinergic system.
Brain Res 498:257–266
43. Petitto JM, McNamara R, Gendreau PL,
Huang Z, Jackson A (1999) Impaired learning
and memory and altered hippocampal neurodevelopment resulting from IL-2 gene deletion. J Neurosci Res 56:441–446
44. Schöpke R, Wolfer DP, Lipp HP, LeisingerTrigona MC (1991) Swimming navigation and
structural variations of the infrapyramidal mossy
fibers in the hippocampus of the mouse.
Hippocampus 3:315–328
45. Schwegler H, Crusio WE, Lipp HP, Heimrich B
(1988) Water-maze learning in the mouse correlates with variation in hippocampal morphology. Behav Genet 18:153–165
46. Schwegler H, Crusio WE (1995) Correlations
between radial-maze learning and structural
variations of septum and hippocampus in
rodents. Behav Brain Res 67:29–41
47. Beck RD Jr, King MA, Ha GK, Cushman JD,
Huang Z, Petitto JM (2005) IL-2 deficiency
results in altered septal and hippocampal cytoarchitecture: relation to development and neurotrophins. J Neuroimmunol 160:146–153
48. Altman J, Bayer SA (1990) Migration and distribution of two populations of hippocampal
granule cell precursors during the perinatal and
postnatal periods. J Comp Neurol 301:
365–381
49. Cameron HA, McKay RD (2001) Adult neurogenesis produces a large pool of new granule
cells in the dentate gyrus. J Comp Neurol 435:
406–417
50. Schwegler H, Crusio WE, Lipp HP, Brust I,
Mueller GG (1991) Early postnatal hyperthyroidism alters hippocampal circuitry and
improves radial-maze learning in adult mice.
J Neurosci 11:2102–2106
51. Alderson RF, Alterman AL, Barde YA,
Lindsay RM (1990) Brain-derived neurotrophic
factor increases survival and differentiated

15
functions of rat septal cholinergic neurons in
culture. Neuron 5:297–306
52. Morse JK, Wiegand SJ, Anderson K, You Y,
Cai N, Carnahan J, Miller J, DiStefano PS,
Altar CA, Lindsay RM et al (1993) Brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) prevents
the degeneration of medial septal cholinergic
neurons following fimbria transection. J
Neurosci 13:4146–4156
53. Ward NL, Hagg T (2000) BDNF is needed for
postnatal maturation of basal forebrain and
neostriatum cholinergic neurons in vivo. Exp
Neurol 162:297–310
54. Knipper M, da Penha Berzaghi M, Blochl A,
Breer H, Thoenen H, Lindholm D (1994)
Positive feedback between acetylcholine and
the neurotrophins nerve growth factor and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the rat
hippocampus. Eur J Neurosci 6:668–671
55. Larsson E, Mandel RJ, Klein RL, Muzyczka N,
Lindvall O, Kokaia Z (2002) Suppression of
insult-induced neurogenesis in adult rat brain
by brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Exp
Neurol 177:1–8
56. Lee J, Duan W, Mattson MP (2002) Evidence
that brain-derived neurotrophic factor is
required for basal neurogenesis and mediates,
in part, the enhancement of neurogenesis by
dietary restriction in the hippocampus of adult
mice. J Neurochem 82:1367–1375
57. Besser M, Wank R (1999) Cutting edge: clonally restricted production of the neurotrophins
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3 mRNA by human immune cells
and Th1/Th2-polarized expression of their
receptors. J Immunol 162:6303–6306
58. Canossa M, Griesbeck O, Berninger B,
Campana G, Kolbeck R, Thoenen H (1997)
Neurotrophin release by neurotrophins: implications for activity-dependent neuronal plasticity.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:13279–13286
59. Saarelainen T, Vaittinen S, Castren E (2001)
trkB-receptor activation contributes to the
kainate-induced increase in BDNF mRNA synthesis. Cell Mol Neurobiol 21:429–435
60. Hellweg R, Humpel C, Lowe A, Hortnagl H
(1997) Moderate lesion of the rat cholinergic
septohippocampal pathway increases hippocampal nerve growth factor synthesis: evidence for long-term compensatory changes?
Brain Res Mol Brain Res 45:177–181
61. Beck RD Jr, King MA, Huang Z, Petitto JM
(2002) Alterations in septohippocampal cholinergic neurons resulting from interleukin-2
gene knockout. Brain Res 955:16–23

Interleukin-2 and the Brain…

311

62. Hock C, Heese K, Hulette C, Rosenberg C,
Otten U (2000) Region-specific neurotrophin
imbalances in Alzheimer disease: decreased levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and
increased levels of nerve growth factor in hippocampus and cortical areas. Arch Neurol 57:
846–851
63. Merrill JE (1990) Interleukin-2 effects in the
central nervous system. Ann N Y Acad Sci 594:
188–199
64. Quirion R, Aubert I, Robitaille Y, Gauthier S,
Araujo DM, Chabot JG (1990) Neurochemical
deficits in pathological brain aging: specificity
and possible relevance for treatment strategies.
Clin Neuropharmacol 13:73–80
65. Zalcman SS (2002) Interleukin-2-induced
increases in climbing behavior: inhibition by
dopamine D-1 and D-2 receptor antagonists.
Brain Res 944:157–164
66. Turka LA, Walsh PT (2008) IL-2 signaling and
CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ regulatory T cells.
Front Biosci 13:1440–1446
67. Horak I, Lohler J, Ma A, Smith KA (1995)
Interleukin-2 deficient mice: a new model to
study autoimmunity and self-tolerance.
Immunol Rev 148:35–44
68. Kundig TM, Schorle H, Bachmann MF,
Hengartner H, Zinkernagel RM, Horak I
(1993) Immune responses in interleukin-2deficient mice. Science 262:1059–1061
69. Schorle H, Holtschke T, Hunig T, Schimpl A,
Horak I (1991) Development and function of
T cells in mice rendered interleukin-2 deficient
by gene targeting. Nature 352:621–624
70. Kalman J, Engelhardt JI, Le WD, Xie W,
Kovacs I, Kasa P, Appel SH (1997) Experimental
immune-mediated damage of septal cholinergic
neurons. J Neuroimmunol 77:63–74
71. Semba K, Fibiger HC (1988) Time of origin of
cholinergic neurons in the rat basal forebrain.
J Comp Neurol 269:87–95
72. Huang Z, Dauer DJ, Ha GK, Lewis MH,
Petitto JM (2009) Interleukin-2 deficiency
induced T cell autoimmunity in the mouse
brain. Neurosci Lett 463:44–48
73. Cardona AE, Li M, Lui L, Savarin C, Ransohoff
RM (2008) Chemokines in and out of the central nervous system: much more than chemotaxis and inflammation. J Leukoc Biol 84:
587–594
74. Huang Z, Danielle M, Petitto JM (2011) Loss
of CNS IL-2 gene expression modifies brain T
lymphocyte trafficking: Response of normal
versus autoreactive Treg-deficient T cells.
Neurosci Lett 499:213–218

Chapter 16
Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells:
The Chromium Release Whole Blood Assay
Mary Ann Fletcher, Zachary Barnes, Gordon Broderick,
and Nancy G. Klimas
Abstract
Natural killer (NK) cells are an essential component of innate immunity. These lymphocytes are also sensitive
barometers of the effects of endogenous and exogenous stressors on the immune system. This chapter will
describe a chromium (51Cr) release bioassay designed to measure the target cell killing capacity of NK cells
(NKCC). Key features of the cytotoxicity assay are that it is done with whole blood and that numbers of
effector cells are determined for each sample by flow cytometry and lymphocyte count. Effector cells are
defined as CD3−CD56+ lymphocytes. Target cells are the K562 eyrthroleukemia cell line. Killing capacity
is defined as number of target cells killed per effector cell, at an effector cell/target cell ratio of 1:1 during
a 4 h in vitro assay.
Key words: Natural killer cells, NK cells, Natural killer cell cytotoxicity, NKCC, Lymphocytes, K562
target cells, Chromium release assay, Innate immunity, Flow cytometry

1. Introduction
The natural killer (NK) cell is a large, granular lymphocyte with ability
to lyse tumor cells and virus-infected cells without prior exposure
and immunization (1). These cells can prolong asymptomatic states
in HIV-infected persons with low CD4 counts (2) and protect against
malignancy (3). The NK cell is a reliable marker of neuroendocrine–
immune interactions. Stressful life events that trigger the fight or
flight response, such as a natural disaster, can alter lymphocyte
trafficking and function, leading to elevated (p < 0.001) natural killer
cell cytotoxicity (NKCC) and number of circulating NK cells
(p < 0.000) as were seen in post Hurricane Andrew samples (4).
According to a metaanalysis by Segerstrom and Miller (5), the mobilization of NK cells during acute psychologic stressors is one of the most

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_16, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

313

314

M.A. Fletcher et al.

Table 1
Friedman test: effect of aerobic exercise on NK cell counts
in Gulf War illness cases (T0 = baseline; T1 = V O2 max; T2 = 4 h)
Column name

Count

Ranked sum

Average rank

T0 CD3−CD56+ cells

37

70.50

1.64

T1 CD3−CD56+ cells

37

119.00

2.77

T2 CD3−CD56+ cells

37

68.50

1.59

Column name

Mean

T0 CD3−CD56+ cells 138.13

Std. dev. Median 25–75

Percentiles

72.13

127.00

90.00 168.25

T1 CD3−CD56+ cells 461.66 276.09

417.00

252.00 560.00

T2 CD3−CD56+ cells 141.74

132.00

93.00 173.00

73.39

χ = 38.03000
Probability = 0.000000
2

Table 2
Friedman test: effect of aerobic exercise on NK cell counts
in healthy controls (T0 = baseline; T1 = VO2 max; T2 = 4 h)
Column name

Count

Ranked sum

Average rank

T0 CD3−CD56+ cells

35

59.50

1.42

T1 CD3−CD56+ cells

37

119.00

2.83

T2 CD3−CD56+ cells

37

73.50

1.75

Column name

Mean

T0 CD3−CD56+ cells 148.75

Std. dev. Median 25–75

Percentiles

80.94

147.00

82.00 204.00

T1 CD3−CD56+ cells 642.74 377.05

602.00

358.00 802.00

T2 CD3−CD56+ cells 176.29 106.73

172.00

109.00 203.25

χ2 = 46.08300
Probability = 0.000000

replicated and robust findings in human psychoneuroimmunology.
For example, 45 first-time tandem parachutists were examined for
NK activity 2 h before, immediately after, and 1 h after jumping.
Functional capacity of NK cells increased immediately after jumping
followed by a decrease significantly below starting values 1 h later
(6). In laboratory studies with Gulf War Illness patients and healthy
controls, serial measurements showed a significant and rapid positive
effect of an aerobic exercise challenge (VO2 max) on the number of
NK cells as shown in Tables 1 and 2. NK cell activity is also affected
as shown in Fig. 1 (7, 8).

16

Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells…

315

20
N = 40; p = .001

% NKCC

16
12
8
4
0
Baselin e

V02 max

Fig. 1. Effect of exercise challenge to V O2 max on NKCC (% of target cells killed at a target
cell ratio of 1:1) in 40 healthy controls.

Acute psychological stress may result in increased risk of infection,
for example development of colds in rhinovirus inoculated volunteers (9). Sustained stress resulted in lower natural killer cell cytotoxicity (NKCC) in Japanese critical care physicians in individuals taking
0–3 days off per month, as compared to those taking 4 or more days
off (10). Abnormalities of the stress response are hypothesized as a
trigger or mediator of chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) which is
associated with low NKCC (11) (Figs. 2 and 3). The NK cells from
patients with CFS have diminished intracellular perforin (12).
The process of cytolysis can be divided into three stages: conjugate formation (binding of the effector cell to the target cell),
triggering of the lytic process (signal transduction), and lethal hit
(granule exocytosis). Once triggered, the cytolytic process may
propagate as effector cells detach from lysed targets and recycle to
initiate new lytic interactions. The binding of the NK cell to the
target cell involves receptors and ligands, but unlike cytotoxic T cells,
does not result from antigen recognition. Following the targeteffector cell contact, intracellular granules move to the surface of
the NK cell. Perforin from these granules facilitates the release
of serine proteases, granzymes, and their passage through the target cell membranes. Granule exocytosis requires binding of the
secreted perforin to the target cell membrane and polymerization
of this perforin to polyperforin. Intracellular perforin can be quantitatively measured and is a marker for NK cell function (12).
Transient expression of CD107a occurs on the NK cell surface following perforin release and can be used as surrogate marker for NK
activity (13).
This chapter will describe a chromium (51Cr) release bioassay
designed to measure the target cell killing capacity of NK cells.
This type of assay was first used over 40 years ago as a quantitative tool to assess lymphocyte-associated cytolysis (14).

316

M.A. Fletcher et al.

40
Healthy Controls

Men = 27.84
Std. Dev. = 12.268
N = 230

Frequency

40

40

10

0
0.000

40.000

20.000

60.000

NKCC%

Fig. 2. Histogram of NKCC (% of target cells killed at a target cell ratio of 1:1) for 230
healthy controls.

Radioactive chromium binds to intracellular proteins. Upon lysis of
the target cell, the intracellular 51Cr is released in an amount proportional to the amount of cell lysis. Key features of this NKCC assay are
that it is done with whole blood and that numbers of effector cells
are determined for each sample by flow cytometry and lymphocyte
count (15, 16). The use of fresh, whole blood is important for studies in psychoneuroimmunology. The NK cells are not subjected to
centrifugation and separation from their soluble and cellular milieu.
The whole blood samples are incubated with 51Cr labeled target cells
at four target to effector cell ratios, in triplicate for 4 h.

2. Materials
and Equipment
2.1. Equipment

1. Multiparameter flow cytometer.
2. Electronic hematology instrument.
3. Automatic gamma counter.
4. Centrifuge with swing-out holders for 96-well culture plates.

16

Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells…

317

40

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Patients

Frequency

30

Mean = 15.95
Std. Dev. = 11.384
N = 176

20

10

0
0.000

10.000

20.000

30.000

40.000

50.000

NKCC %

Fig. 3. Histogram of NKCC (% of target cells killed at a target cell ratio of 1:1) for 176 chronic fatigue syndrome cases.

5. Electronic timer.
6. Biological hood.
7. Aerobic filter unit.
8. Water-jacketed incubator (37 °C. 5% CO2, 95% humidity).
9. Repeat dispenser micropipetter.
2.2. Supplies

1. Sterile polypropylene centrifuge tubes.
2. Sterile micropipettes tip (ranging from 1 μL to 1 mL).
3. Sterile transfer pipettes.
4. Sterile 75 mL tissue culture flasks.
5. Sterile 96-well flat bottom tissue culture plates.

2.3. Reagents

1. Triton X.
2. Fetal bovine serum (FBS).
3. RPMI 1640 medium (1×), without glutamine.
4. Minimum essential medium. Non-essential amino acids (MEM,
10 mM, 100×).

318

M.A. Fletcher et al.

5. Sodium pyruvate (1 mM).
6. L-glutamine 200 mM (100×), aliquoted into 5 mL and stored
at −20 °C.
7. Penicillin (5,000 U) and streptomycin (5,000 μg/mL) (100×)
aliquoted into 5 mL and stored at −20 °C (Pen-Strep).
8. Trypan blue (0.4%).
9. Triton X-100.
10. 51Cr (5 milliCurrie (mCi)).

3. Methods
3.1. Pre Assay
Preparations
(in Biohazard Hood
with Sterile Technique)
3.1.1. Tissue Culture

1. Stock Media (SM): In a flask mix 500 mL of RPMI, 5 mL of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), 5 mL MEM, 5 mL sodium
pyruvate. Filter through 0.2 μm-pore size filter.
2. Assay Media (AM): Mix and filter (0.2 μm-pore size filter)
90 mL of SM and 10 mL of FBS.
3. Culture Media (CM): Mix and filter (0.2 μm-pore size filter)
85 mL of SM and 15 mL of FBS.
4. Storage Requirements: Chromium in solution, Stock Media,
Assay Media, Non-Essential Amino acids, FBS, MEM, Sodium
Pyruvate, should all be kept in the refrigerator at 2–8 °C for up
to 1 week. L-Glutamine and Pen-Strep should be kept in the
freezer at −20 °C.
5. Target cells: The usual target cell is the K562 erythroleukemic
cell line available from the ATCC http://www.atcc.org/ . The
NK sensitive K562 cell line is maintained in a humidified 5%
CO2 atmosphere at 37 °C in stationary suspension in CM. Cells
are subcultured twice weekly to produce log-phase growth (see
Note 1, 4 × 106 cells in 20 mL of CM will yield approximately
16 × 106 cells).

3.1.2. Patient Preparation

1. No special preparation is necessary. However, if possible the
sample should be collected in the morning so that the assay,
which requires several hours to complete, may be done in the
same day. Also, NK cell count varies in a circadian rhythm over
24 h (17).

3.1.3. Specimen Collection
and Handling Conditions

1. Using standard aseptic technique, collect by venipuncture
3 mL whole blood into a sodium heparin tube and 1 mL of
whole blood into an ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA)
tube. Universal precautions should be observed when handling
the blood sample and all biohazardous materials. Chromium
used in this procedure is radioactive and should be handled

16

Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells…

319

Table 3
Dilution of target cells
Final concentration
(cells/mL)

Amount of initial cell
suspension (2 × 106 cells/mL)

Amount of
media (mL)

2 × 106

2

0

1 × 106

1

1

0.5

1.5

0.25

1.75

0.5 × 106
0.25 × 10

6

using appropriate safety standards. Except when stated otherwise,
all transfers of cells and biological fluids should be done in the
biological hood. However, after the final incubation is complete, samples may be handled outside of the hood, but still
with caution as to avoid cross-contamination.
3.2. Assay Procedure
3.2.1. Target Cell
Preparation (in Biohazard
Hood with Sterile
Technique)

1. Pour the entire volume of cultured cells in flask into a 50 mL
conical tube. Remove 100 μL of the cell suspension and combine them with100 μL of trypan blue for the initial cell count.
Spin 50 mL conical tube at low speed (400 × g) for 5 min.
2. Pour off the supernatant into waste, and add 10 mL of room
temperature SM to re-suspend the cells. Centrifuge for 5 min
at 400 × g.
3. Remove the supernatant, add the chromium solution equal to
100 μCi, for each 20 × 106 cells mix. The amount of 51Cr
depends on weeks of “age” (time elapsed since the date of calibration of the chromium solution, see Note 2). Incubate for
1 h at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere, with gentle
shaking every 15 min.
4. In the same 50 mL tube, add 10 mL of 37 °C AM to the
chromium/cell solution, mix gently, and spin at 400 × g for
5 min. Pour off the supernatant into the radioactive waste container. Repeat this washing four times.
5. After the fourth wash add 10 mL of 37 °C AM. Remove 50 μL
of cell/assay media solution to a test tube; add 50 μL trypan
blue for the final cell count in order to determine the volume
of assay media needed to produce a cell count of 2 × 106 K562
cells. With remaining solution in the 50 mL tube, centrifuge
for 5 min at 400 × g.

3.2.2. NKCC Reaction
Setup

1. Pour off supernatant from step 5 of 3.2.1 above and add the
volume of room temperature AM proscribed by the final cell
count, and mix gently. In separate tubes make graded dilutions
to produce the four target cell concentration as shown in Table 3.

320

M.A. Fletcher et al.

An assay with four blood samples requires a minimum of 2 mL
of each target cell dilution.
2. Add 150 μL well mixed blood from EDTA tube to each well
of one row in culture plate.
3. For spontaneous release control (SR), dispense 150 μL AM to
one row of 12 wells.
4. For total release control (TR), dispense 150 μL 1% Triton
X-100 one row of 12 wells.
5. Add 50 μL cell suspensions to each of three wells for each of
the four dilutions (change tips if progressing from stronger to
weaker concentration, otherwise tips can be conserved for
one row).
6. Cover plate and centrifuge for 10 min at room temperature at
400 × g.
7. Incubate for plate at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere
for 4 h.
8. After 4 h add 100 μL of cold (below 9 C) assay media to all
wells to stop the NKCC reaction and centrifuge for 5 min at
400 × g.
3.2.3. Harvesting
and Counting

1. Transfer 100 μL supernatant to counting test tubes without
disturbing cell pellet. Start with highest concentration of TR
controls, followed by SR controls and finally patient samples.
After the last well insert at least three empty test tubes to serve
as background.
2. Load the racks into gamma counter and count released 51Cr.

3.2.4. Lymphocyte Count

This information is required for calculation of NKCC using (1).
This should be done using an electronic hematology analyser,
which will provide the hematocrit that is also needed for (1).

3.2.5. Flow Cytometry

Lymphocytes that are CD45+, CD14−, CD3−, and CD56+ constitute the bulk of the cells capable of NK cell cytotoxic activity.
Using four color flow cytometry, determine the percent of cells in
the lymphocyte gate that meet this requirement. Multiply this by
the lymphocyte count to obtain the number of NK cells for (1).

3.2.6. Calculations

Subtract the background counts (b) from all experimental release
(ER), SR, and TR and calculate the percent cytotoxicity for each
dilution of target cells according to (1).
% cytotoxicity =
⎡ (ER − b) × {(V t − (Vb × HCT))/V t } − (SR − b) ⎤
⎢
⎥ × 100
(TR − b) − (SR − b)
⎣
⎦

(1)

Vt is total volume in the well; Vb is the volume of blood in the well;
HCT is the hematocrit of blood sample.

16

Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells…

321

When a constant number of NK cells is incubated with various
numbers of 51Cr-labled target cells, the numbers of target cells
lysed may be expressed as percent cytotoxicity times the number of
target cells in the assay. A curve is generated by plotting the number of target cells vs. the number of cells lysed. Because the kinetics
of cytotoxicity resemble those of enzyme–substrate interactions,
the Michaelis Menten rate equation as developed by Cleland (18)
defines the velocity of such reactions (2):
v=

V max [T ]
K m + [T ]

(2)

where v is the number of target cells lysed; T is the number of
target cells in the assay; Vmax is the number of target cells lysed
when the number of target cells is infinite; and Km is the number of
target cells required for ½Vmax.
Callewaert and Mahle (19) showed that estimates for Vmax for
NKCC are equal to the concentration of NK cells times the mean
lytic activity per NK cells. Percent NKCC for the four concentrations of target cells is transformed to the number of target cells
killed at each concentration using (3):
v = % cytotoxicity [T ]

(3)

The data are then fitted to the Cleland equation. Percent cytotoxicity is determined for effector cell to target cell ratio of 1:1,
where the number of effector cells is defined as CD3−CD56+
lymphocytes.
3.2.7. Quality Control
for Assay

There is no commercial proficiency test available for this procedure.
For quality control, always perform the assay in triplicate and have
blinded duplicates submitted to the laboratory. The SR should be
<20% of TR and the correlation coefficient (r^2) for the Michaelis
Menten equation should be >90%. Each laboratory must determine
an expected range for healthy individuals. In our laboratory, the
230 healthy controls shown in Fig. 1 had a mean % cytotoxicity at
an effector to target cell ratio of 1:1 of 28%. Table 4 gives the parameters of NKCC for controls and a patient group, CFS

3.2.8. Performance
Parameters

Outlying individual scores when found in triplicate data sets (i.e.,
from three wells from the same tube), should be excluded, and the
scores which are closest to one another in the set should be averaged for results.

3.2.9. Limitations
of the Procedure

This procedure is done with fresh blood samples. Blood that is
<8 h old is preferred. Samples that are <8 but >24 h can be run.
However, the results must be compared to the control range determined for samples of that age.

322

M.A. Fletcher et al.

Table 4
Natural killer cell cytotoxicity for chronic fatigue syndrome
(CFS) and healthy controls
Subject group and distribution statistics

Statistic

Std. error

CFS

15.94688
14.25328
17.64047
12.05000
129.601
11.384233
1.200
55.300
54.100
13.675
1.392
1.718

0.858119

27.83922
26.24533
29.43310
28.00000
150.502
12.267920
2.000
69.000
67.000
17.025
0.211
−0.033

0.808923

HC

Mean
95% Confidence
interval for mean
Median
Variance
Std. deviation
Minimum
Maximum
Range
Interquartile range
Skewness
Kurtosis
Mean
95% Confidence
interval for mean
Median
Variance
Std. deviation
Minimum
Maximum
Range
Interquartile range
Skewness
Kurtosis

Lower bound
Upper bound

Lower bound
Upper bound

0.183
0.364

0.160
0.320

4. Notes
1. Splitting K562 cell cultures. Note: In labs performing the
NKCC assay on a daily or weekly basis, the existing cell line of
K562 is cultured and continually split using the following procedure which is repeated identically every week, with the
exceptions of long weekends or periods when the test is not
performed. Tissue culture flasks should always be labeled with
the date when they were prepared, written on them.
(a) On Monday: Label four flasks with the date, “K562,” and
the volumes included; (for example, if 2 mL of cells and
16 of culture media are added, label: “2 +16 media”).
(b) From the Incubator, remove one of the tissue culture
flasks from the previous Friday (should be dated), and
withdraw 4 mL and put into a flask labeled for Monday’s
date. Repeat. Then withdraw 2 mL from the same flask
from Friday and add this to a third Monday flask. Repeat
for a fourth Monday flask.

16

Psychoneuroimmunology and Natural Killer Cells…

323

(c) Complete each of these flasks to 20 mL with Culture Media.
(d) Place the newly composed flasks in the incubator, and discard the Friday one from which transfers were made.
(e) On Tuesday: Use the remaining flask from the previous
Friday for any NK samples to be done on Tuesday. (No
splitting on Tuesday).
(f) On Wednesday: Read fully: Repeat the procedure from
Monday, except using one of Monday’s flasks for transfers,
and label the new flasks with Wednesday’s date. Note, also,
you will this time only compose one flask using 2 mL from
the Monday culture, instead of two. The other two new
flasks will be 4 mL additions. (Complete to 20 mL with
Culture Media).
(g) On Thursday: Use the remaining flask from Monday for
any NK samples to be done on Tuesday. (No splitting on
Thursday).
(h) On Friday: Split one of Wednesday’s flasks to four new,
Friday flasks, with 1.5 mL going to 2 of them, and 0.5 mL
going to two other new, Friday flasks. Complete to 20 mL
with Culture Media.
(i) Repeat this process weekly. If necessary to do a Saturday
NK, make an additional 2 mL flask on Wednesday.
2. Radioactive Chromium-51 usage.
For the addition of Chromium in step 1c, different volumes of
the Chromium solution are added depending on the “age,” or
time elapsed since the date of calibration of the Chromium
solution. The Calibration date of the particular solution vial is
on the label.
Week 1

90 μL of chromium

Precalibration days

Week 2

100 μL of chromium

Calibration date

Week 3

120 μL of chromium

Post calibration days

Week 4

140 μL of chromium

Post calibration days

Week 5

160 μL of chromium

Post calibration days

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the NIAAA: R21AA016635
(PI MA Fletcher); NIAID: R01AI065723 (PI MA Fletcher);
CFIDS Assoc. of America: (PI N Klimas); NIAID: UO1 AI459940
(PI N Klimas); NIAMSD R01 AR057853-01A1 (PI N Klimas);
VA merit awards (PI N Klimas) Dynamic Modeling in GWI, CFS/
ME; GW080152 (PI N Klimas).

324

M.A. Fletcher et al.

References
1. Herberman RB, Holden HT (1979) Natural
killer cells as antitumor effector cells. J Natl
Cancer Inst 62:441–445
2. Solomon GF, Benton D, Harker JO, Bonavida B,
Fletcher MA (1994) Prolonged asymptomatic
states in HIV-seropositive persons with fewer
than 50 CD4+ T cells per MM3.
Psychoneuroimmunologic findings. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 741:85–90
3. Su DM, Vankayalapati R (2010) A new avenue
to cure cancer by turning adaptive immune
T cells to innate immune NK cells via reprogramming. J Mol Cell Biol 2:237–239
4. Ironson G, Wyings C, Schneiderman N et al
(1997) Post-traumatic stress symptoms, intrusive
thoughts, loss and immune function after
Hurricane Andrew. Psychosom Med 59:128–141
5. Schedlowski M, Jacobs R, Stratmann G et al
(1993) Changes of natural killer cells during
acute psychological stress. J Clin Immunol
13:119–126
6. Segerstrom SC, Miller GE (2004) Psychological
stress and the human immune system: a metaanalytic study of 30 years of inquiry. Psychol
Bull 130:601–630
7. Klimas NG, Rosenthal M, Fletcher MA (2006)
Immune effects of an acute exercise challenge
in Gulf War Illness. Assoc Military Surgeons
US, San Antonio
8. Harvey JM, Barnes Z, Zeng et al (2011)
Exercise effects on biomarkers of CFS/ME and
GWI. Presented to the International Conference
on CFS/ME, Ottawa, Canada
9. Cohen S, Tyrrell DA, Smith AP (1991)
Psychological stress and susceptibility to the
common cold. N Engl J Med 325:606–612
10. Okamoto H, Tsunoda T, Teruya K et al (2008)
An occupational health study of emergency
physicians in Japan: health assessment by
immune variables (CD4, CD8, CD56, and NK

cell activity) at the beginning of work. J Occup
Health 50:136–146
11. Fletcher MA, Zeng XR, Maher K et al (2010)
Biomarkers in chronic fatigue syndrome: evaluation of natural killer cell function and dipeptidyl
peptidase IV/CD26. PLoS One 5(5):e10817
12. Maher K, Klimas NG, Fletcher MA (2005)
Chronic fatigue syndrome is associated with
diminished intracellular perforin. Clin Exp
Immunol 142:505–511
13. Alter G, Malenfant JM, Altfeld M (2004)
CD107a as a functional marker for the
identification of natural killer cell activity.
J Immunol Methods 294:15–22
14. Brunner K, Mauel TJ, Cerottini J-C et al
(1968) Quantitative assay of the lytic action of
immune lymphoid cells on Cr labeled allogeneic target cells in vitro Inhibition by isoantibody and by drugs. Immunology 14:181
15. Baron GA, Klimas NG, Fischl MA et al (1985)
Decreased natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity per effector cell. Diagn Immunol
3:197–204
16. Fletcher MA, Baron GA, Ashman MA et al (1987)
Use of whole blood methods in assessment of
immune parameters in immunodeficiency syndromes. Diagn Clin Immunol 5:69–81
17. Bourin P, Mansour I, Doinel C, Roué R et al
(1993) Circadian rhythms of circulating NK cells
in healthy and human immunodeficiency virusinfected men. Chronobiol Int 10:298–305
18. Cleland WW (1967) The statistical analysis of
enzyme kinetic data. Adv Enzymol Relat Areas
Mol Biol 29:1
19. Callewaert DM, Mahle NH (1985) Kinetic
models of natural killer cells and their use for
studying activated NK cells. In: Herberman
RB, Callewaert DM (eds) Mechanisms of
cytotoxicity by NK cells. Academic, Orlando,
p 381

Chapter 17
The Application of PET Imaging
in Psychoneuroimmunology Research
Jonas Hannestad
Abstract
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging is a research tool that allows in vivo measurements of brain
metabolism and specific target molecules. PET imaging can be used to measure these brain variables in a
variety of species, including human and non-human primates, and rodents. PET imaging can therefore be
combined with various experimental and clinical model systems that are commonly used in psychoneuroimmunology research.
Key words: PET, FDG, PBR, TSPO, Inflammation, Microglia, Endotoxin

1. Introduction
1.1. The Basics
of Positron Emission
Tomography

Nuclear imaging refers to imaging modalities that measure the
amount of radioactivity emitted from a tissue or organ in vivo after
the injection of a radiopharmaceutical. The radioactivity measured
in the tissue that is being studied, when combined with the measurement of radioactivity in the blood (the so-called input function),
is used to quantify a physiologic process or the availability of binding
sites of a target molecule. Radiopharmaceuticals are commonly
(and interchangeably) called radioligands or radiotracers; the latter
refers to the fact that the mass dose of the radiopharmaceutical
administered is very low. Such “tracer” amounts rarely have any
measurable physiologic or biochemical effects, and they do not
interfere with the process which they are designed to measure.
Radiotracers are designed to measure a specific metabolic process
(e.g., glucose metabolism, oxygen uptake, blood flow) or to bind
to a specific extra- or intracellular target molecule (e.g., a neurotransmitter receptor or transporter, or a molecule that is found
in a specific cell type). Positron emission tomography (PET) is a

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_17, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

325

326

J. Hannestad

type of nuclear imaging in which the radiotracer emits positrons,
positively charged particles with characteristics that are very similar
to those of the negatively charged electron. This distinguishes PET
imaging from another common modality of nuclear imaging—
single photon computed tomography (SPECT)—in which the
radiotracer emits gamma photons directly. The common terms are
summarized in Table 1.
1.2. Radionuclides
and Radiotracers

A nuclide is an atom that has a specific number of protons and
neutrons in its nucleus. While the number of protons determines
which element an atom is (e.g., carbon has six protons), an element can have several isotopes: nuclides with the same number of
protons but different numbers of neutrons (e.g., 11C and 12C have
five and six neutrons, respectively). The chemical properties of a
nuclide depend on the number of electrons (which equals the
number of protons and determines which element it is) but not on
the number of neutrons. Therefore, different isotopes of the same
element have the same chemical properties, and one can therefore
substitute one isotope for another during chemical synthesis. The
physical properties (e.g., radioactivity) of a nuclide depend on both
the number of protons and neutrons. Some nuclides are unstable
and decay by emitting radiation; these are called radionuclides.
Nuclear imaging is possible because: (1) isotopes are chemically
interchangeable and can be substituted in chemical structures, and
(2) some nuclides emit radiation. A PET radiotracer is therefore a
synthetic or semi-synthetic molecule with certain chemical and
biological properties (i.e., affinity for the target molecule, ability to
cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), etc.) in which a positronemitting isotope has been substituted for an original nuclide in the
molecule (e.g., 11C replaces 12C). In PET imaging, the radionuclides used are positron emitters, which are rich in protons relative
to neutrons. When the proton in the nucleus decays, it is converted
to a neutron, and a positron and a neutrino are emitted. This type
of decay is called β+ decay or positron emission. This differs from
β− decay in which a neutron is converted to a proton, and an electron and an anti-neutrino are emitted. The difference in energy
between the pre-decay nuclide and the post-decay nuclide is called
transition or decay energy. Positron emitters have a decay energy
≥1.022 MeV. When a positron-emitting radionuclide decays, the
decay energy is shared between the positron and the neutrino.
(Proton-rich nuclides that have a decay energy of less than
1.022 MeV decay by electron capture.)
The radioactivity of a radionuclide is the amount of radiation it
emits per unit of time. Radioactivity is measured in disintegrations
per second (Becquerels or Bq in the Système International d’Unités)
and in Curies (Ci) which denotes the radioactivity of 1 g of 226Ra
(3.7·1010 Bq). For practical purposes, doses of radiotracers administered in PET imaging are often described using the Ci units.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

327

Table 1
Definitions of common terms used in PET imaging
Activity
(radioactivity)

Number of disintegrations per minute of a given radionuclide

Annihilation

The interaction of a positron and electron, which gives rise to two
annihilation photons traveling in opposite direction

Attenuation

An annihilation photon interacts with the tissue and does not reach the PET
detectors, thus not contributing to the signal

Becquerel (Bq)

Disintegrations per second. A measure of activity. Mostly expressed as megaBq
(MBq)

Biological half-life

The time it takes for the body to eliminate half of the radiotracer molecules

Curies (Ci)

The radioactivity of 1 g of radium. Mostly expressed as milliCuries (mCi)

Decay

Emission of radiation due to an unstable configuration of the nucleus

Decay energy

The differential energy of the pre-decay radionuclide and the post-decay nuclide

Dynamic PET
imaging

PET imaging that consists of a sequence of contiguous, discrete measurements
of emitted radiation

Effective half-life

The combination of the physical and the biological half life

Emission scan

The PET scan that measures radiation emitted from the brain

Input function

The changes in radioactivity in the blood over time as the radiotracer is
metabolized, decays and enters tissues

Non-colinearity

The fact that the angle between the two annihilation photons is not
exactly 180°

Nondisplaceable
binding

Binding of the radiotracer that is not displaceable with an excess of “cold”
radiotracer. This is the sum of nonspecific binding and free tissue radiotracer

Nonspecific binding Binding of the radiotracer to molecules other than the target molecule
Normalization

The use of a positron-emitting phantom to calibrate each PET detector pair

Physical half-life

The time it takes for the radioactivity to be halved. Constant for each
radionuclide

Positron range

The distance a positron travels before annihilation

Radiotracer

A pharmaceutical or other molecule in which a radionuclide has been
substituted for the original nuclide

Radionuclide

A nuclide that decays and therefore emits radiation. Radionuclides used in PET
imaging are positron emitters

Scatter

The process in which a photon interacts with tissue and changes direction

Specific binding

Binding or the radiotracer to the target molecule

Static PET imaging

The measurement of total emission radiation from a tissue over a period of time

Transmission scan

A scan that uses an external source of radiation to measure the attenuation of
the organ or tissue to be imaged. This information is then used for attenuation-correction during image reconstruction

328

J. Hannestad

For example, doses of radiotracer that are injected into human subjects during PET imaging are mostly in the 5–20 mCi range. Most
journals require the use of Bq. Atoms decay randomly; however,
the physical half-life, i.e., the time it takes for a given radioactivity
to be reduced by 50%, is constant for each radionuclide. The effective half-life of a radiotracer takes into account the physical half-life
of the radionuclide and also the biological half-life, which depends
on metabolism and elimination. Therefore, the effective half-life is
the time it takes to eliminate from an organism half of the radioactivity administered. This halving of radioactivity is a combination
of decay (physical half-life) and metabolism/excretion (biological
half-life). For radionuclides with a very long physical half-life (e.g.,
124
I or 76Br), the effective half-life is for practical purposes identical
to the biological half-life. In other words, the radiotracer is metabolized and excreted before the radionuclide loses any significant
amount of radioactivity. Conversely, for radionuclides with a very
short physical half-life (e.g., 15O or 82Rb), the effective half-life is
practically identical to the physical half-life. That is, the radionuclide decays so fast that the radioactivity is close to zero before any
significant amount of radiotracer has been metabolized and eliminated from the body. Radionuclides with long half-lives (e.g., 124I)
can be purchased from a vendor, and the nuclide can be incorporated in the radiotracer molecule during on-site synthesis (if the
facility has a radiochemistry lab). Radionuclides with intermediate
half-lives (e.g., 18F) can be incorporated into a radiotracer by a
vendor, and the radiotracer can be shipped that same day for use at
a PET facility that does not have the ability to synthesize radiotracers (this is commonly done in clinical medicine). For radionuclides
with short half-lives (e.g., 11C), the nuclide must be produced onsite using a cyclotron and incorporated into the radiotracer molecule in the radiochemistry lab. One important advantage of
radiotracers with short half-lives is that multiple PET scans can be
performed in 1 day.
1.3. Annihilation
and Photon
Interactions

When a positron-emitter decays in a tissue, the positron travels a
short distance (usually <1 mm) before losing energy and interacting
with an electron. This interaction leads to the annihilation of both
the positron and the electron. Because the momentum at the time
of interaction is almost zero and momentum has to be conserved,
the annihilation cannot give rise to a single photon. Rather, two
photons traveling in approximately opposite direction from the site
of annihilation arise (Fig. 1). These photons, called annihilation
photons, are in the gamma spectrum of energy and therefore have
the same properties as “real” gamma photons, i.e., photons that
arise directly from decay of the nucleus. Because of their high
energy, many of these photons will escape the body, and the PET
camera can detect them as described in detail below; however,
some of these photons will interact with atoms in the tissue through

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

329

Fig. 1. Positron annihilation. The positron emitted during decay of a positron-emitting
nuclide (18F in this case) travels a short distance before interacting with an electron. Both
are annihilated and two annihilation photons emerge. These travel in opposite directions
and will either be detected by the PET system’s detector crystals, or interact with the tissue.
Adapted from: Dilsizian V, Di Carli F, Narula J (2009) Essential atlas of cardiovascular disease,
vol 1, Chap 14. Copyright 2009 by Current Medicine, Inc. Reproduced with kind permission
from Springer Science + Business Media B.V.

which they travel. Interactions with atoms in the tissue contribute
to two important phenomena: Attenuation and scatter. Attenuation
refers to the fact that deeper parts of an organ appear to emit less
radioactivity than superficial parts because the photons from, e.g.,
the thalamus must traverse more tissue before reaching the PET
camera detectors than photons from the cortex. Therefore, fewer
photons (per volume of tissue) from the thalamus will reach the
detectors. Scatter refers to the fact that some photons will collide
with other particles, changing their direction. During the reconstruction of the final PET image, both attenuation and scatter are
accounted for (see below). There are three ways the annihilation
photons interact with the tissue: the photoelectric process,
Compton scattering, and pair production. The photoelectric process
occurs when a lower energy photon ejects an electron from an
atom, and all the energy of the photon is transferred to the electron.
The resulting X-ray photon does not escape the tissue and therefore
the annihilation photon is completely “absorbed,” i.e., there is no
detectable trace of this when measuring radiation from the tissue
with a PET camera. Therefore, the photoelectric process contributes
to attenuation. In Compton scattering, which is the prevalent form
of interaction between annihilation photons and a tissue, a higher
energy photon interacts with an outer shell electron. This electron
is ejected together with a scattered photon with less energy than
the incident photon. Compton scatter contributes to attenuation if
the scattered photon never reaches the PET camera, or to background
noise, if the photon is detected by the PET camera. If the PET
camera detects and “counts” a scattered photon, it will misread the
localization of the annihilation event because the photon changed
direction. To reduce the likelihood of detecting scattered photons

330

J. Hannestad

as “true” counts, the PET camera has a specific energy window;
Compton scattering leads to a loss of energy so that scattered photons are more likely to have energy below the lower limit of this
window. In addition, correction for scatter is done during image
reconstruction in an attempt to reduce the background signal from
scatter. The last type of interaction an annihilation photon can have
with the tissue is pair production, which occurs when the photon
has an energy ³1.022 MeV and it interacts with the nucleus of an
atom, producing a positron and an electron. This new positron will
undergo annihilation as described above and gives rise to a new
pair of annihilation photons which can be detected by the PET
camera, but which do not represent the localization of a radiotracer
molecule. These three types of interactions reduce the signal-to-noise
ratio. Therefore, an annihilation photon which interacts with the
tissue can contribute to attenuation (i.e., it does not continue on
the path it started and is therefore not able to “inform” the PET
camera of the amount of radioactivity where it originated) and to
scatter (if Compton scattering or pair-production gives rise to
gamma-energy photons that provide “wrong” information to the
PET camera). The aim of the PET detection system and subsequent
corrections is therefore to avoid (as much as possible) counting
photons that are produced by these three types of interactions, and
to count as many of the photons that are produced during annihilation of the positron that emits from the radiotracer and that reach
the detection material without interacting with the tissue (“true
counts” or “trues”).
1.4. PET Detection
Systems

PET systems detect annihilation photons using a solid scintillation
detector, a crystal material with which the photon interacts to produce
visible-light photons (scintillations). The most commonly used
solid scintillation crystals in PET imaging are bismuth germanate
(BGO), lutetium oxyorthosilicate with cerium (LSO), and yttrium
oxyorthosilicate with cerium (YSO). These crystals vary in some
important properties including: (1) stopping power (the distance
the annihilation photon travels in the crystal before it interacts with
an atom and deposits its energy), (2) scintillation decay time (the
time, in nanoseconds, it takes from when the annihilation photon
excites an atom in the detector crystal until this atom emits a visible-light photon), (3) the light output (how much light is emitted
when an annihilation photon excites a crystal atom), and (4) the
energy resolution (the fraction of the 511 keV energy that is
“converted” to visible light). In addition, these crystals should
have a high ratio of photoelectric to Compton interactions (the
opposite of what tissue has). This is because photoelectric interactions
will deposit the energy in the crystal (desired), whereas Compton
scattering may result in photons entering adjacent detectors,
contributing to misreads.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

331

The visible-light photons that are produced in the detector
crystals are in turn detected by a photomultiplier tube, which converts
the energy of these photons into an electrical pulse. This pulse is
amplified and sorted by a pulse-height analyzer. The photomultiplier
tube only accepts photons within a certain energy window (usually
350–650 keV) to avoid scattered photons (which lose energy during
Compton interactions as described above). The narrower this
window, the more precise the energy discrimination is, but the
lower the detection efficiency (the ability of the detector material
to detect as many of the annihilation photons as possible). High
detection efficiency allows scan times to be shorter and radiotracer
doses to be lower. The detector elements are connected by a coincidence circuit with a window of 6–20 ns to ensure that a photon
pair originates from the same positron annihilation. The pair of
photons must be detected along a line, i.e., by two detectors that
are facing each other. This line does not pass exactly through the
site where the decay occurred because the positron travels ~1 mm
before annihilation. For radionuclides with high energy (e.g., 15O)
the positron range is higher, and this can cause a blurring effect of
several millimeters. For more commonly used radionuclides (e.g.,
11
C and 18F), the positron range is lower and the blurring effect is
less than 0.2 mm. In this case, the photon range is therefore not a
limiting factor in the resolution of PET systems used for humans.
An annihilation can arise anywhere along the line connecting a
pair of detectors, i.e., the PET camera is not able to determine the
exact location where the event occurred, only that it occurred
somewhere along a certain line connecting two detectors. Although
the annihilating photons will be at close to a 180° angle, this is
approximate because any residual momentum that the positron–
electron pair has before annihilation will cause the angle to be
slightly less than or more than 180°, a phenomenon called noncolinearity. The blurring effect of noncolinearity is amplified in large
diameter PET cameras, and for human cameras the blurring effects
due to noncolinearity can be up to 2 mm.
All the counts from all the detector pairs over the course of a
PET scan are combined through a process called computed tomography, an algorithm that computes cross-sectional images that
approach the actual concentration of radioactivity in the tissue.
This allows the event count for each pixel to be determined, which
in turn is used to construct a three-dimensional image of radioactivity
in the organ or tissue. The PET image can be co-registered to a
magnetic resonance (MR) image of the same brain, and, because
MR has higher resolution, facilitate region-of-interest analysis.
PET measurements of radiation emitted from a radiotracer in
the brain can be static (a continuous measure of radioactivity during
a certain amount of time) or dynamic, i.e., a sequence of contiguous
acquisitions which can each last anywhere from 10 s to over 20 min.

332

J. Hannestad

Longer acquisition times have better counting statistics but poor
temporal resolution, while shorter acquisitions have better temporal
resolution, but are noisier. In dynamic PET imaging, data from
each “frame” is independently reconstructed to form a set of
images. This allows for a measurement of the change in radioactivity
in the brain over time. List-mode data acquisitions directly use the
arrival time to estimate a dynamic range, and this approach provides
extremely high temporal resolution with full spatial resolution.
1.5. Data Correction

As mentioned above, several corrections must be applied to ensure
that each voxel value represents (as close as possible) the real tissue
radioactivity concentration. Because detector pairs may have different detection efficiencies, a calibration process called normalization is used. A “phantom” (a cylinder that emits positrons in a
homogeneous manner) is placed in the PET camera and any differences in measured radioactivity will be used to calibrate (normalize)
the detector pairs before the PET camera is used for brain scans.
As described above, annihilation photons undergo attenuation
when traversing a tissue. A transmission scan, in which an external
radioactive beam goes through the organ to be imaged (e.g., the
head), is acquired to measure how much different parts of the
organ attenuate radioactivity. This is often done before the emission
scan (the scan which measures radioactivity emitted from the
radiotracer). If no direct measurement of attenuation is performed
(i.e., no transmission scan), attenuation correction can be done
using a mathematical model. Several methods are used to correct
for scatter, and a description of these is beyond the scope of this
chapter. Additional corrections are performed for random coincidences
(two photons that reach a detector pair within the time window,
but which do not originate from the same annihilation event) and
for dead time (the time it takes for the PET camera to process an
event, a time during which another event cannot be detected).
In Subheading 2 of this chapter we provide two protocols, one
for a radiotracer used in functional brain imaging (i.e., imaging of a
metabolic or biochemical process) and one for a radiotracer used in
molecular imaging (i.e., imaging of a target molecule). The following
sections apply mostly to radiotracers used in molecular imaging.

1.6. Radiotracer
Kinetics

After intravenous administration, a radiotracer will distribute
throughout the body according to its biophysical and biochemical
properties (e.g., lipophilicity, protein binding, etc.), and it will
undergo metabolism depending on its chemical structure.
Metabolism of most radiotracers, as is the case with most pharmaceuticals, occurs in the liver; rarely a radiotracer can undergo metabolism in the brain. When a radiotracer is metabolized, sometimes a
lipophilic radioactive metabolite can cross the BBB and contribute
to non-specific binding. If the radiometabolite does not cross the
BBB, the measurements of radioactivity in blood and plasma will

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

333

determine how much is due to the “parent” radiotracer and how
much is due to the metabolite. Parent radiotracer in the blood that
is “free” (i.e., non-protein-bound) is available to diffuse across the
BBB into the brain parenchyma. Similarly, free (non-target-bound)
radiotracer in the brain parenchyma can diffuse back across the BBB
and enter the bloodstream again. At equilibrium, those two will be
equal (i.e., free plasma radiotracer concentration = free tissue
radiotracer concentration). Since the plasma concentration can be
measured, we can calculate how much of radioactivity in the brain
is due to free tissue radiotracer concentration and how much is due
to bound radiotracer. The input function is a measure of the timecourse of radioactivity in the blood or plasma (usually obtained
through arterial and/or venous blood sampling). The input function is used to calculate how much radiotracer is available for uptake
into the brain, so that the measurements of radioactivity in the brain
can be used to estimate the total binding, which, when taking into
account the amount of non-specific binding, can be used to estimate
the availability of the target molecule.
If a radiotracer does not undergo metabolism in the brain and
radioactive metabolites do not cross the BBB, the concentration of
the radiotracer in the brain (and hence the amount of radiation
emitting from the brain that will be measured by the PET camera)
will depend on: (1) how much radiotracer is available to enter the
brain from the blood, and (2) the affinity of the radiotracer for the
target molecule. However, not all the radioactivity in the brain
represents specific binding because in addition to binding to the
target molecule, the radiotracer also binds to other molecules; the
latter is called non-specific binding (see below). The ratio of specific
and non-specific binding will influence the signal-to-noise ratio of
a radiotracer. That is, an ideal radiotracer should bind specifically
to the target molecule with high affinity and have very low affinity
for all other molecules. With such a radiotracer, the level of radioactivity in the brain relative to that in blood would correlate very
closely with the density of the target molecule in the brain.
1.7. Specific,
Non-specific, and
Non-displaceable
Binding

Non-specific binding refers to the fact that radiotracers bind to
molecules other than the target. This binding will contribute to
the overall radioactive signal from the brain and therefore must be
taken into account to allow a more precise estimate of specific
binding and target molecule availability. One way of determining
the fraction of total binding that is attributable to non-specific
binding is to administer “cold” (i.e., non-radioactive) radiotracer
that will displace the “hot” radiotracer from the target molecule by
competitive binding. That is, such displacement only reduces specific
binding, while it has minimal effect on non-specific binding and on
free tissue radiotracer concentration. The difference in total binding
between when only “hot” radiotracer is administered and when a
high dose of “cold” radiotracer is co-administered indicates the

334

J. Hannestad

specific (or displaceable) binding. The binding that remains, also
known as non non-displaceable binding because high doses of cold
radiotracer is not able to further decrease total binding by displacing
the hot radiotracer, is the sum of non-specific binding and free tissue
concentration. During the characterization of a new radiotracer,
studies are conducted mostly in non-human primates to determine
the level of non-displaceable binding. This information is later
included in mathematical models of tracer kinetics (tracer kinetic
modeling) that are used to quantify the level of specific binding in
a PET study.
For certain target molecules, endogenous molecules compete
with the radiotracer. For instance, if a neurotransmitter binds to a
receptor, it will compete with and displace the radiotracer (and vice
versa) depending on each molecule’s affinity for the receptor. This
phenomenon can be used to estimate changes in levels of endogenous
ligands, e.g., dopamine. If an experimental intervention increases
endogenous levels of dopamine, this will cause a reduction in the
binding of a dopamine receptor radiotracer (because more dopamine
displaces more radiotracer), and this can be measured using PET
imaging (see for example ref. (1)).
Several measures of radiotracer binding are used in the literature;
however, increasingly the field is moving towards a consensus nomenclature (2). A detailed description of measures of binding is beyond
the scope of this chapter; however, one frequently used measure is
volume of distribution (VT), which refers to the ratio of how many
milliliters of blood contain the same amount of radiotracer as 1 cm3
of brain tissue. For instance, a VT = 20 mL/cm3 means that 20 mL of
plasma has the same amount of radiotracer as 1 cm3 of brain, i.e., the
concentration in the brain is 20 times higher than in plasma. (Even
though mL and cm3 are both measures of volume and VT is therefore
technically unitless, the units of VT are maintained.) As described
above, the reason the concentration is higher in the brain is because
the radiotracer binds to molecules in the brain and less free radiotracer
is available to diffuse back into the bloodstream. However, VT does
not indicate whether the radiotracer in the brain is specifically bound.
Within the brain, binding may occur to the target molecule, to other
molecules, or not at all (free tissue radiotracer); therefore, VT indicates the total amount of radiotracer in the tissue (specifically bound,
non-specifically bound, and free). For a radiotracer that diffuses freely
across the BBB, at equilibrium the concentration of free tissue
radiotracer equals the concentration of free (non-protein-bound)
plasma radiotracer. Therefore, at equilibrium, VT = specific + nonspecific binding. For a detailed discussion of the relationship between
VT and binding potential, please see ref. (2).
1.8. Basics
of Psychoneuroimmunology

This brief overview of brain-immune interactions is provided so that
this chapter can be a stand-alone resource. Readers familiar with this
area may skip this part and continue with the Subheading 2.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

335

It is well known that systemic inflammation can have profound
effects on the brain. The impact on the brain, and the pathways
through which this occurs, depends in part on the severity of systemic
inflammation. For instance, in severe systemic inflammation, e.g.,
sepsis, the BBB can be disrupted, and leukocytes, inflammatory
cytokines, and bacterial toxins can enter the brain parenchyma
from the blood. This may lead to significant disruption of brain
function, including neuronal death (3), which may explain why
sepsis in humans is associated with long-term cognitive decline (4).
In mild systemic inflammation, even though the BBB remains
intact, there are measurable effects on the brain. This happens
because the brain receives information from the rest of the body,
including the immune system, so that it can coordinate the activities
of various systems and organs. The immune system, when faced
with “danger signals” (e.g., pathogen-associated molecules or molecules indicative of tissue damage) releases inflammatory cytokines
which have both local and systemic effects. The systemic effects
include fever, activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis and the autonomic nervous system, and changes in
behavior, emotions, and cognition, all effects that are mediated by
the brain (5). The evolutionary purpose of these responses is
believed to be the optimization of the ability of the immune system
to fight off the pathogen, while minimizing collateral damage to
tissues and organs, optimizing the chances of survival (6). The
notion that the brain receives and interprets information from the
immune system is supported by several lines of evidence. For
instance, inflammatory cytokines released during viral infections
are associated with changes in mood (7). After experimental exposure of human subjects to rhinovirus or influenza virus, blood levels
of inflammatory cytokines predicted a reduction in positive affect
the following day (8). Other mild immune stimuli are associated
with an increase in depressive symptoms in humans (9–13). In the
rodent literature, support for this is substantial and it shows us how
the immune system communicates with the brain (14–17). One
commonly used experimental paradigm in rodents is systemic
administration of endotoxin, a component of the wall of gramnegative bacteria. Endotoxin binds to the Toll-like 4 receptor on
innate immune cells, initiating an intracellular cascade that eventually
leads to the release of inflammatory cytokines, e.g., tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). These cytokines then signal
to the brain, leading to a constellation of behaviors similar to
depression in humans: anhedonia, decreases in novelty-induced
and social behaviors, reduced food intake, and sleep disturbance
(18). Depending on the dose of endotoxin used, depressive-like
behaviors in rodents may continue after the acute sickness behavior
ends (19). Such delayed effects from immune stimuli may occur
because increased brain and peripheral levels of cytokines can last
for several weeks (20, 21). Endotoxin administration in humans also

336

J. Hannestad

produces depressive-like symptoms, e.g., fatigue and anhedonia (22).
The endothelium of the BBB plays an essential role in mediating
inflammatory signals from the bloodstream to the brain parenchyma
(23, 24). The luminal surface of BBB endothelial cells has receptors
for inflammatory cytokines and for endotoxin; binding of any of
these triggers a nuclear factor κB-dependent pathway (25, 26),
which allows transduction of the signal across the BBB. In addition
to the endothelium, the brain can also detect peripheral inflammatory
signals through afferent vagal fibers (27–29). Ultimately, systemic
inflammation in rodents induces expression of inflammatory mediators in brain parenchyma (16). This has also been demonstrated
in human and non-human primates (30, 31). It is therefore reasonable
to assume that immune-to-brain pathways are similar in rodents
and humans. In addition to the effects of the immune system on
the brain, the brain can modulate immune responses. One important
anti-inflammatory pathway is the HPA axis, activation of which
leads to release of cortisol, which has potent anti-inflammatory
effects (32). The efferent vagus also exerts anti-inflammatory
effects through the release of acetylcholine, which may act directly
on nicotinic receptors on immune cells (33) or through the activation
of the splenic nerve with release of anti-inflammatory norepinephrine
in the spleen (34). Therefore, the communication between the
brain and the immune system can be viewed as a loop, in which
the immune system provides information to the brain about
immune events in the body, and the brain uses this information to
modulate the immune system. Whether dysregulation in these
pathways plays a role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric disorders, in
particular depression, is a topic of great interest and controversy (5).

2. Materials
2.1. Materials
Required for the
Molecular Imaging
Protocol

1. Nitrogen gas containing 1% oxygen (for generation of (11C)
CO2 in the cyclotron).
2. Helium (carrier gas for the cyclotron).
3. Hydrogen (reagent for the reduction of (11C)CO2 to (11C)
CH4).
4. Shimalite-Ni (catalyst for the above reduction).
5. Gas-phase iodine (reagent for the MicroLab for the generation
of (11C)CH3I).
6. N,N-Dimethylformamide (anhydrous).
7. Tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (1.0 M solution in methanol).
8. Aqueous HCl (0.3 N and 1 mN).

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

337

9. HPLC mobile phase (32% acetonitrile/68% buffer solution of
10 mM ammonium formate with 10 mM formic acid, v/v).
10. Semi-preparative HPLC columns (Onyx Monolithic C18,
100 mm × 10.0 mm, Phenomenex).
11. Waters Classic C18 SepPak cartridges.
12. USP absolute ethanol.
13. USP 0.9% NaCl solution.
14. USP 4.2% sodium bicarbonate solution.
15. Deionized water.
16. Liquid nitrogen (for cooling of reactor during trapping of
(11C)CH3I in the precursor solution).
17. Sterile membrane filters (33 mm diameter, 0.22 μm pore size,
Millex® GV, Millipore).
18. Sterile empty collection vial, 10 mL.
19. Analytical HPLC mobile phase (44% acetonitrile/56% 0.1 M
ammonium formate (v/v)).
20. HPLC column for quality control analysis (Gemini C18(2),
4.6 mm × 250 mm, 5 μm, Phenomenex).

3. Methods
3.1. Functional
Imaging with FDG-PET

Functional imaging refers to a brain imaging modality that is used to
obtain an estimate of cellular (neuronal) activity. If a disease state or
an experimental intervention is associated with changes in neuronal
activity, one can use functional imaging to measure this and identify
the brain regions involved. An important caveat is that functional
imaging cannot distinguish between neuronal activity and that of
other cells in the brain (e.g., astrocytes). One commonly used form
of functional imaging is functional MR imaging (fMRI), in which
MR is used to measure changes in oxygenated blood in the brain.
The assumption is that an increase in regional blood flow (which is
under tight physiologic control) is indicative of increased metabolic
demand and therefore increased cellular activity in a brain region.
Functional imaging can also be performed with PET. In this case, a
molecule that is used metabolically by cells, e.g., oxygen or glucose,
is labeled with a radionuclide, and PET imaging is used to measure
changes in the utilization of this molecule. For instance, fluorine-18labeled 2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) is commonly used, both clinically
(oncology) and in research (neuroscience). Deoxyglucose, like glucose, is transported across the BBB and taken up by cells in the
brain. Inside cells both the molecules are phosphorylated by the
enzyme hexokinase and converted to FDG-6-PO4 and glucose6-PO4, respectively. Unlike glucose-6-PO4 which enters the process

338

J. Hannestad

of glycolysis, FDG-6-PO4 is not a substrate of the enzyme
phosphoglucose isomerase or any other enzyme inside the cell; it
therefore gets “stuck” inside the cell. The biological half-life of FDG
is therefore very long, which means that the effective half-life is
equivalent to the physical half-life of 18F (110 min). In other words,
FDG will emit positrons for several hours after it was administered
to the subject, and this radioactivity will occur in the cells which
took up FDG shortly after it was administered. This is an advantage
in study design (see below). The amount of FDG taken up by a
given cell depends approximately on how much glucose that cell
needs in that moment, a process that is believed to be tightly regulated. That is, the degree of FDG uptake is proportional to the metabolic activity of the cell at the time of FDG administration.
Therefore, the radioactive signal detected from a certain brain region
is an indication of the metabolic activity in that region at the time of
FDG administration. The underlying assumption is that a significant
proportion of this emission is due to neuronal activity. Although
astrocytes are less metabolically active than neurons, because astrocytes are up to ten times more numerous than neurons, they account
for a large proportion of the FDG signal. A detailed discussion of the
theoretical underpinnings of FDG imaging is beyond the scope of
this chapter, but there are several excellent review papers available,
e.g., ref. (35).
The fact that the signal from FDG can be detected with a PET
camera several hours after injection, while the amount of radiation
(e.g., the FDG uptake) depends on the metabolic activity at the
moment of injection, is an advantage of FDG-PET over fMRI.
This allows us to use FDG-PET imaging to measure neuronal
activity while the subject is not in the scanner. One can take advantage of this property of FDG and design research studies in which
a subject undergoes an experimental intervention that cannot be
performed in the scanner but during which the injection of FDG
can allow us to “capture” metabolic activity at that time. Another
factor in the decision to use FDG-PET over fMRI for functional
imaging is whether the measurement of absolute metabolism,
rather than relative changes in blood flow, is important for the
study question. With FDG-PET, provided that one has an appropriate input function (either through an arterial line or cardiac
imaging; see below) one can obtain precise estimates of absolute
glucose utilization in brain regions of interest. (fMRI compares
blood flow between two different states, but does not give an absolute
value of metabolism.) One important advantage of fMRI over
FDG-PET is cost; the latter is several times more expensive.
FDG was approved by FDA in 1994; therefore, unlike most
other PET radiotracers, its use in human subjects does not require
an FDA investigational new drug application (IND). There are a
few examples in the literature of the use of FDG-PET imaging in
psychoneuroimmunology research. For instance, Semmler et al.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

339

used FDG-PET in rats that received high doses of endotoxin and
found that systemic inflammation was associated with a global
reduction in metabolism, especially in the cortex, and that this
correlated with necrosis in post-mortem samples (3). Capuron
et al. used FDG-PET to measure changes in glucose metabolism in
patients who received treatment with interferon-alpha, a mild,
iatrogenic, inflammatory stimulus that is associated with emergence of depressive symptoms, and found that changes in glucose
metabolism in the nucleus accumbens and putamen correlated
with interferon-induced fatigue (36). Our group used FDG-PET
to measure changes in glucose metabolism in human subjects who
received endotoxin, which induces a state of transient systemic
inflammation as described above. We found increased metabolism
in the insula and reduced metabolism in the cingulate.
3.1.1. Protocol
for FDG-PET

In addition to common exclusion criteria used in human subjects
research, some additional screening procedures that are specific to
PET and MRI include:
1. Ensure that the subjects are medically healthy and that the
PET imaging procedures will not put them at undue risk.
2. Exclude subjects with any medical or psychiatric condition that
may affect brain glucose metabolism.
3. Use a pregnancy test for women at screening and before each
radiotracer injection, and advise women subjects to avoid getting
pregnant while participating in the study.
4. Screen for MR contraindications, e.g., metal implants, a history
of metalwork, etc., since an MR is required to properly analyze
the PET scan.

3.1.2. Endotoxin
Administration in Human
Subjects

Endotoxin administration in humans requires a physician-sponsored
IND application with FDA. For alternatives to endotoxin in human
subjects research, see Note 1. Endotoxin for human use is provided
by the NIH Clinical Center upon request (contact Dr. Anthony
Suffredini). For the background on Clinical Center Reference
Endotoxin (CCRE), see Note 2. Endotoxin vials should be stored
in the refrigerator (2–8°C). The preparation of endotoxin for human
use should be performed by a pharmacist.
1. Reconstitute vials with 5 mL of Sterile Water for Injection,
USP. (When reconstituted as recommended, each milliliter
contains 200 ng of Reference Endotoxin, 2 mg of lactose, and
200 μg of polyethylene glycol 6000. The vials do not contain
a preservative; the reconstituted solution should be used within
24 h. Unused portions should be stored at −70°C).
2. Because endotoxin does not go into solution readily, intermittently shake the vial for 30 min by hand, or use a vortex shaker
or equivalent.

340

J. Hannestad

3. Dilute the dose further with 0.9% sodium chloride for injection
to a final volume of 3 mL so that the volume in the syringe is
the same for each subject and with placebo.
4. Draw the reconstituted solution up in a syringe for administration.
5. Label syringe with subject name, date of birth, date of administration, and study ID number.
6. Use immediately or store in the refrigerator (2–8°C) for up to
24 h.
7. Administer the desired endotoxin dose as a 1-min IV bolus
after subject preparation is complete and monitoring equipment is in place.
3.1.3. Subject Preparation
and Monitoring

In advance of the PET sessions, each subject needs an MRI scan to
allow for co-registration and PET image analysis.
1. Ask the subject fast overnight, but to drink plenty of water.
2. Ask the subject not to ingest any alcohol or take any over-thecounter medications for 48 h prior to the scan.
3. Record blood pressure, heart rate, and temperature upon
arrival to the PET center.
4. Obtain urine for a pregnancy test for women subjects.
5. Obtain urine for drug and alcohol testing.
6. Insert one IV catheter in each forearm (see Notes 3 and 4).
7. Administer 500 mL of normal saline over 20 min to ensure
hydration (this is required for endotoxin administration but
not for FDG-PET).
8. Place cardiac leads and continuously monitor heart rate (this is
required for endotoxin administration but not for FDG-PET).
9. Obtain any baseline blood samples or behavioral ratings.
10. Administer endotoxin or placebo as an IV bolus and flush with
saline.
11. Record blood pressure and heart rate every 15 min for the first
2 h after endotoxin administration, then every 30 min thereafter, and record body temperature hourly (this is required for
endotoxin administration but not for FDG-PET).
12. Perform behavioral ratings and obtain blood draws at desired
intervals.

3.1.4. FDG-PET Image
Acquisition

The following FDG-PET protocol is adapted from the one used at
the Yale PET Center. The input function is derived from cardiac
imaging rather than from an arterial line. If (18F)FDG needs to be
purchased, please see Note 5 for vendors.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

341

1. Place subject in the PET camera feet first, supine, with arms
outside the scanner so that the heart is in the field-of-view
(FOV).
2. Select correct orientation for cardiac images (“supine” and
“feet first”).
3. Acquire 2-min positioning scan to ensure that the FOV contains
the left ventricle (LV).
4. Display image in a “volume tool” window.
5. Adjust bed if necessary.
6. Immobilize chest with a belt to minimize movement so that
the region-of-interest (ROI) can be accurately placed in the
LV during image analysis.
7. Acquire a 5-min transmission scan (for attenuation correction).
8. Inject 5.0 mCi 18F-FDG via a pump over 1 min.
9. Acquire a 35-min dynamic 2D emission scan of the heart as ten
30-s frames followed by ten 180-s frames.
10. Starting at 15 min after FDG injection, obtain venous blood
samples in heparinized (purple top) tubes every 5 min for a
total of TEN samples (see details in Subheading 3.1.5
below).
11. Immediately after the end of the cardiac scan, move the subject
out of the camera, turn the subject around so that the head is
in the field of view and the arms along the side.
12. Immobilize patient’s head using a chinstrap.
13. Acquire a 1-min positioning scan of the brain.
14. Display the image in a “volume tool” window to ensure the
brain is in the FOV.
15. Adjust bed if necessary.
16. Acquire a 10-min 3D emission scan of the brain.
17. Acquire a 5-min transmission scan of the brain.
18. Remove the subject from the scanner. (At that time, depending
on whether the subject requires further monitoring or the
experiment involves further assessments, the IV lines may be
removed and the subject can leave.)
3.1.5. Blood Processing

1. Prepare and weigh 20 Wizard gamma counter tubes (10 for
whole blood and 10 for plasma).
2. At 15 min post-FDG injection, initiate venous blood sampling
(~3 mL each) every 5 min (15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55,
60 min).

342

J. Hannestad

3. Obtain three samples for glucose determination during the
FDG portion of the study. Standard glucose sample times are
15, 35, and 50 min post injection.
4. Put 2–3 drops of whole blood in pre-weighed Wizard tubes.
5. Weigh tubes with whole blood.
6. Centrifuge the rest of the whole blood samples for 10 min to
separate plasma.
7. Pipette ~1 mL of plasma into pre-weighed Wizard tubes.
8. Weigh tubes with plasma.
9. Run whole blood samples on the gamma counter.
10. Run plasma samples in gamma counter.
3.1.6. FDG-PET Image
Analysis

Reconstruction of the brain scan can be built into the protocol and
is done after the brain transmission scan. The images are corrected
for decay, attenuation, and scatter. Reconstruction parameters for
the 3D brain scan are: method = iterative; image size = 128; iterations = 6; subsets = 16; zoom = 2; brain mode = off; offset (cm):
X = 0.0, Y = 0.0; filter = butterworth; kernel FWHM(cm) = 6.0; butterworth filter order = 5; axial filtering = On; scatter correction = On.
Reconstruction of the dynamic heart emission scan is done after
the acquisition of the brain scan. This reconstruction may take 2 h
and needs to be done offline. Reconstruction parameters for the 2D
heart scan are: method = iterative; image size = 256; iterations = 6,
subsets = 16; zoom = 1; brain mode = off; offset (cm): X = 0.0,
Y = 0.0; filter = butterworth; kernel FWHM(cm) = 6.0; butterworth
filter order = 5; axial filtering = On; scatter correction = On.
1. Identify four non-adjacent (every other) left ventricular slices
for region of interest (ROI) placement.
2. Draw an ROI in each of the four LV slices. The circular ROI
should have a diameter of approximately 6 pixels (<2 cm).
3. Calculate the average LV time–activity curve from the time–
activity curves derived from the ROI in each of the four slices.
4. Average the activity of plasma samples taken at 20, 25, 30, and
35 min.
5. Average the 25–35 min PET frames and allow identification of
myocardial FDG uptake.
6. Divide 6 by 7.
7. Use this ratio to scale the 40–60-min blood sample
concentrations.
8. Append the scaled 40–60-min samples to the LV curve to
complete the input function.
9. Smooth the tail of the input function by fitting sum of exponentials starting at the 5-min post FDG injection time-point.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

343

10. Reslice individual MPRAGE MR data to match the spatial
orientation of brain PET image data and extract non-brain
tissue.
11. Co-register the individual PET image to the subject’s MR
using a six-parameter linear registration.
12. Define ROIs manually in each individual, or use an automated
anatomical labeling (AAL) template, e.g., (37).
13. Generate parametric images of rCMRGlu using the input function and the reconstructed brain tomographic data.
14. Calculate whole-brain FDG uptake using the MR-based
template.
15. Generate regional CMRGlu (rCMRGlu; mg·100/g min)
values for ROIs (for absolute vs. relative glucose metabolism,
see Note 6).
3.2. Molecular PET
Imaging

Molecular or receptor imaging refers to the use of PET (or SPECT)
imaging to measure the availability of specific receptors or other
molecules of interest (e.g., neurotransmitter transporters, cellspecific markers). These radiotracers are designed to bind to a
specific molecule so that its distribution and density can be measured in vivo. Although some radiotracers are commercially available, the majority of radiotracers that have been developed at PET
facilities around the world require on-site synthesis. The molecular
imaging protocol described here involves (11C)PBR28, a radiotracer
that binds to a molecule found mostly in microglia; a brief description of these cells and the molecular target is therefore provided
next as background.

3.2.1. Microglia

Microglia (resident macrophages of the brain) are involved in a variety of physiologic and pathologic processes; most importantly, in the
initiation and maintenance of neuroinflammation. When provided
with molecular signals from neurons, astrocytes, pathogens, or tissue
damage, resting microglia become activated and release substances
that can cause neuronal dysfunction and damage, e.g., inflammatory
cytokines and reactive oxygen species (38), by interfering with neurotransmission, inhibiting neuroplasticity, and causing neuronal death
(39). Microglia can also be activated by systemic inflammation. For
instance, peripheral administration of endotoxin in rodents is associated with activation of microglia (3, 20). Once stimulated, microglia
can stay activated for several months and continue to express
inflammatory mediators (20, 39, 40). Activation of microglia by
endotoxin or inflammatory cytokines leads to further release of
inflammatory cytokines and other potentially neurotoxic substances
(39), while exposure to anti-inflammatory cytokines induces a neuroprotective microglial phenotype (41–43). Because of the pivotal
role that microglia play in a variety of neurodegenerative,

344

J. Hannestad

Fig. 2. Synthesis of (11C)PBR28. The radiotracer (11C)PBR28 is synthesized by 11C-methylation of its precursor, N-(2hydroxybenzyl)-N-(4-phenoxypyridin-3-yl)acetamide, or desmethyl PBR28, with (11C)CH3I generated from cyclotron-produced (11C)CO2. DMF dimethylformamide; TBAOH tetrabutylammonium hydroxide.

neuroinflammatory, and ischemic disorders of the brain, the ability
to measure the activation of microglia in vivo with PET imaging is
an area of great interest.
3.2.2. Translocator Protein

The Translocator Protein (TSPO) is an 18-kDa mitochondrial
protein that is expressed in steroid-synthesizing cells, in which its
role is to allow transport of cholesterol across the mitochondrial
membranes. The expression of TSPO is very low in healthy brain
tissue, but it increases in pathologies associated with microglial
activation including stroke, trauma, infection, and autoimmune
and neurodegenerative disorders (44, 45); therefore PET imaging of TSPO can be used to measure microglial activation in various disease states (46). Several PET radiotracers that bind to
TSPO are available (47). One such radiotracer recently developed at NIH is (11C)PBR28 (48, 49). The 20-min half-life of 11C
permits multiple measurements of microglial activation within a
short time period, which allows for a variety of research design
options. Our group used this radiotracer to measure binding to
TSPO at various times after endotoxin administration in baboons,
an example of which is illustrated in Fig. 2. The protocol for this
is described below.

3.2.3. (11C)PBR28
Synthesis

(11C)PBR28 is a 348.40-kDa TSPO-specific radiotracer developed by
Robert Innis’ group at NIMH (48). The precursor can be obtained
by request. Due to the short half-life of 11C, (11C)PBR28 must be
synthesized on-site (for an 18F alternative, see Note 7). The synthesis
described (Fig. 3) is an adaptation used at the Yale PET Center
radiochemistry lab, under the direction of Yu-Shin Ding, PhD.
1. In a cyclotron, produce no-carrier-added (11C)CO2 using the
14
N(p,α)11C reaction (bombardment of a target of nitrogen
gas containing 1% oxygen).
2. Produce (11C)CH3I from (11C)CO2 via catalytic hydrogenation
to (11C)CH4 followed by reaction with gas phase iodine in a
MicroLab (11C)CH3I generation apparatus.
3. Synthesize (11C)PBR28 by 11C-methylation of the desmethyl
precursor, N-(2-hydroxybenzyl)-N-(4-phenoxypyridin-3-yl)
acetamide, with (11C)CH3I in a TRACERLab™ FxC automated

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

345

Fig. 3. Changes in (11C)PBR28 binding after endotoxin administration. A baboon was scanned with (11C)PBR28 at baseline,
and again 1 and 4 h after receiving intravenous endotoxin administration (0.1 mg/kg). The total volume of distribution
increased approximately twofold 4 h after endotoxin administration, indicating an increase in microglial activation.

synthesis module (GE Medical Systems) or equivalent system
(see Note 8 for synthesis in an AutoLoop module).
4. Deliver (11C)CH3I into a solution consisting of the desmethyl
PBR28 precursor (0.5 ± 0.1 mg) in dimethylformamide
(0.15 mL) and tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (1.0 M solution in methanol).
5. When radioactivity peaks in the reactor vial, allow the reaction
to proceed for 5 min at room temperature.
6. Dilute the reaction mixture with a mixture of 0.5 mL of 0.3 N
aqueous HCl and 0.5 mL of semi-preparative HPLC mobile
phase (32% acetonitrile/68% buffer solution of 10 mM ammonium formate with 10 mM formic acid, v/v).
7. Load the diluted mixture onto a semi-preparative HPLC column
(Onyx Monolithic C18, 100 mm × 10.0 mm, Phenomenex)
and elute with the mobile phase at a flow rate of 3 mL/min.
8. Monitor the HPLC eluent by tandem radioactivity and UV
(λ = 254 nm) detectors.
9. Collect the radioactivity fraction eluted between 15 and
17 min.
10. Dilute this fraction with 50 mL of water and load onto a Waters
Classic C18 SepPak cartridge.
11. Rinse the SepPak cartridge with 10 mL of 1 mM aqueous HCl
and dry with inert gas flow.

346

J. Hannestad

12. Elute the product off the SepPak cartridge with 1 mL of USP
absolute ethanol, followed by 3 mL of USP saline, into a product
vial containing 7 mL of USP saline and 40 μL of 4.2% sodium
bicarbonate, USP.
13. Filter the content in the product vial through a sterile membrane
filter (33 mm diameter, 0.22 μm pore size, Millex® GV, Millipore)
into a sterile assembly comprised of a 1 mL sterile quality control
vial connected to a vented 10 mL sterile dose vial.
3.2.4. PBR28 Quality
Control

Determine specific activity, chemical purity, and radiochemical
purity of the radiotracer by HPLC analysis. A Shimadzu LC-20AT
Prominence system equipped with a SPD-M20A Diode Array
detector or SPD-20A UV/Vis detector (230 nm) connected in
series with a Bioscan Flow-Count gamma-detector can be used for
quality control analysis.
1. Elute the Gemini C18 analytical column (5 μm,
4.6 mm × 250 mm) with 44% acetonitrile/56% 0.1 M ammonium formate (v/v) at a flow rate of 2 mL/min.
2. Monitor the product for radioactivity and UV absorbance at
230 nm (tR = 6.7 min).
3. Determine the specific activity of (11C)PBR28 at 230 nm by
counting an aliquot in a dose calibrator for radioactivity and
determine the mass by HPLC against a calibration curve of
authentic reference standard.
4. Confirm the identity of the product by co-injecting the product with the reference standard and co-eluting the UV and
radioactivity peaks on the HPLC chromatogram.

3.2.5. Protocol for Animal
Preparation

The protocol described is for use in baboons because the dose of
endotoxin is high; however, (11C)PBR28 can also be used for lower
dose endotoxin experiments in humans if an IND is obtained (both
for the use of endotoxin and for the use of the radiotracer). The use
of baboons (as opposed to rodents) in PET imaging is advantageous
because of the similarity with human brain size and receptor systems,
and because the body size, peripheral metabolism, and clearance
allow for quantification through kinetic modeling; however, PET
imaging of microglial activation can also be performed in rodents.
1. Equipment needed: physiological monitor, anesthesia machine/
vaporizer, heating pad, emergency drug kit, stereotactic head
holder, lines for vacuum pumps, oxygen tanks.
2. Fast the animal overnight prior to each study day.
3. Anesthetize with ketamine (10 mg/kg i.m.).
4. In the same syringe, administer glycopyrrolate (5–10 μg/kg),
a peripheral antimuscarinic agent that reduces secretions.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

347

5. Connect monitoring equipment (heart rhythm, respiratory
rate, blood pressure, rectal temperature).
6. Perform endotracheal intubation and maintain on ~2%
isoflurane.
7. Monitor end-tidal pCO2 continuously.
8. Insert an arterial line in the femoral artery for measurement of
the input function.
9. Insert an i.v. catheter in the posterior tibial vein for administration
of fluids, radiotracer, and endotoxin.
10. Monitor heart rate, oxygen saturation, and end-tidal pCO2
continuously.
11. Record blood pressure at least every 15 min.
12. Record body temperature every 30 min.
3.2.6. Protocol
for Endotoxin
Administration

The baboon endotoxin model was chosen because it is physiologically and immunologically very similar to human sepsis (50).
Female baboons (Papio anubis) were ovariohysterectomized at
least 3 months prior to the study because estrogen can affect TSPO
expression (45). Endotoxin preparation is similar to that for
humans described above; however, the source of endotoxin is
different.
1. Prepare a solution of endotoxin sufficient to administer a dose
of 0.1 mg/kg body weight.
2. Dissolve endotoxin (lipopolysaccharides from E. coli serotype
O111:B4, Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in saline.
3. A vortex will facilitate dissolution (this may take up to 30 min).
4. Administer as an i.v. bolus in a leg vein and flush with saline to
ensure complete delivery.

3.2.7. Protocol for PET
Imaging in Baboons

1. Position the anesthetized baboon’s head using a modified
Rhesus stereotaxic head holder with a #3 mouth bite.
2. Acquire a 6-min transmission scan (for attenuation correction).
3. Immediately before radiotracer injection, obtain 5 mL venous
blood to estimate plasma protein binding. Keep sample at
room temperature.
4. Administer 5 mCi of (11C)PBR28 with an infusion pump (max
mass per injection: 0.25 μg/kg).
5. Acquire dynamic PET images (33 frames over 2 h).
6. Acquire a second 6-min transmission scan after the emission
scan.
7. Draw blood samples at 0.75, 1.5, 2.25, 3, 3.75, 4.5, 5.25, 6,
8, 19, 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 50, 60, 75, 90, 105, and 120 min
after (11C)PBR28 injection to measure the time course of

348

J. Hannestad

radiotracer and its radioactive metabolites in blood. Maximum
total volume of blood = 1% of body weight.
8. Label and pre-weigh 64 Wizard tubes and divide into five
groups: whole blood (n = 21), plasma (n = 21), acetonitrile
extraction (n = 7), saline standard (n = 6), and blood standard
(n = 9). The two standards will be created and processed as if
they were blood samples.
9. For the saline standard, there will be a total of six samples:
three samples of “plasma” and three ultrafiltrate samples (see
below). For the blood standard, there will be nine samples:
three whole blood, three plasma, and three ultrafiltrate.
10. Count ~5 drops (or 100 μL) of whole blood on the Wizard
gamma counter in a pre-weighed tube. Be sure to get blood in
the bottom. Counting time is 120 s with a 10,000 counts per
second (cps) threshold.
11. Centrifuge whole blood samples collected in potassium EDTA
tubes at 3,900 × g for 5 min to separate plasma.
12. After centrifugation, take 0.1 mL of plasma to count directly
on the Wizard Counter in a pre-weighed tube. Counting time
is 120 s with a 10,000 cps threshold.
3.2.8. Metabolite HPLC
Analysis

1. Mix the plasma sample with urea.
2. Load the clear sample onto filter.
3. Take 0.1 mL of filtrated sample and count on the Wizard
Counter.
4. After filtration, the filter should also be counted.
5. Inject 5 mL into the HPLC loop.
6. The mobile phase consists of: 1:99% 10 mM ammonium
bicarbonate:1% acetonitrile; 2:65% 0.1% ammonium hydroxide:
35% acetonitrile.
For each run, count all fractions on the same counter. Count
time: 60 s for 5, 15, and 30 min samples, and 90 s for 60 and
90 min samples.

3.2.9. Protein Binding

This will be performed in triplicate on the saline standard and the
blood standard, after centrifugation. Pipette ~0.1 mL of whole
blood into the three tubes for the blood standard and spin. For
both standards:
1. Pipette 0.1 mL of spiked plasma into each tube.
2. Pipette 0.3 mL of spiked plasma into the top of three ultrafiltrate
tubes (Centrifree Micropartion Devices No. 4104, Amicon).
3. Centrifuge at 1,100 × g for 20 min.

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

349

4. Pipette ³0.2 mL of filtrate (from the bottom of the ultrafiltrate
unit, the top part pops off and can be discarded) from each
unit and place into tubes.
5. Weigh and count these tubes.
3.2.10. PET Image Analysis

1. Prior to PET scans, acquire a T1-weighted coronal MR
sequence for each baboon with a 3 T scanner. The MR will be
used to assist with anatomical localization of ROIs.
2. Create a template MR image by averaging several individual
baboon MR images after spatial normalization, using a normalized-mutual-information (NMI) linear plus nonlinear
registration.
3. Warp the individual MRI to a baboon MRI template using a
linear plus nonlinear NMI registration.
4. Reconstruct dynamic images from sinograms and correct for
measured attenuation, normalization, random events, scatter,
and deadtime with the attenuation-weighted ordered-subsetexpectation-maximization (OSEM) algorithm (51).
5. Use blood samples to measure the time-course of total radioactivity and the parent fraction in plasma, i.e., the fraction of
plasma radioactivity attributable to (11C)PBR28.
6. Register the PET image to the MR image using the automated
image registration algorithm as an initialization step.
7. Follow by two iterative registrations based on NMI.
8. Combine transformation parameters from the individual registrations (template-to-MRI and MRI-to-PET) and apply to the
PET dynamic data.
9. Calculate mean radioactivity in each ROI for each frame as a
function of time.
10. Generate each regional time–activity curve (TAC; results
expressed as KBq/mL).
11. Fit TACs to the two-tissue compartmental model using the
metabolite-corrected arterial plasma curve as input function.
12. Calculate volume of distribution (VT) from the estimated
model parameters for each ROI.

4. Notes
1. (From Subheading 3.1.2) Endotoxin administration is one of
several methods that can be used to induce mild systemic
inflammation in human subjects for research purposes (see for

350

J. Hannestad

review ref. (5)). Other immune stimuli that are frequently used
include typhoid vaccination and interferon-alpha (which can be
used as treatment or it can be administered to healthy subjects).
The latter two are approved by FDA for human administration
and do not therefore require approval beyond that of the local
institutional review board.
2. (From Subheading 3.1.2) CCRE injectable dosage forms are
manufactured by the Bureau of Biologics. CCRE is a purified
lipopolysaccharide prepared from Escherichia coli O:113 (US
Standard Reference Endotoxin) and vialed under good manufacturing practice guidelines. CCRE comes in 5-mL clear-glass
vials, each containing a white, lyophilized powder which consists
of 10,000 endotoxin units (approximately 1 μg of reference
endotoxin), 10 mg of lactose, and 1 mg of polyethylene glycol
6000. The dose of endotoxin used in humans ranges from 0.2
to 4 ng/kg body weight. If the main purpose is to induce a
state of mild systemic inflammation with subtle symptoms of
depression, a dose of less than 1 ng/kg is recommended (5).
3. (From Subheading 3.1.3) When using two IV lines, use the
one with the best flow for blood sampling and the other one
for administration of the radiotracer and other drugs (e.g.,
endotoxin).
4. (From Subheading 3.1.3) If an arterial line is used for blood
sampling for the input function in lieu of a cardiac scan, only
one IV is required (for administration of radiotracer and
drugs).
5. (From Subheading 3.1.4) If (18F)FDG cannot be synthesized
on site, it can be purchased from:
(a) PETNET Solutions (http://www.petnetsolutions.com/
index.html) with many locations throughout the US and
in Great Britain.
(b) IBA (http://www.iba-molecular.com/delivery-network)
with locations in the US, Western Europe, Turkey, India,
and South Korea.
6. (From Subheading 3.1.6) If there is no significant difference in
whole-brain glucose metabolism between experimental or disease
conditions, one can normalize regional absolute glucose
metabolism to global absolute glucose metabolism to obtain
relative values. In follow-up studies, relative glucose metabolism
can be used, which obviates the need for an input function
(i.e., the brain scan can be performed without a cardiac scan or
arterial line).
7. (From Subheading 3.2.3) Due to the short half-life of 11C,
(11C)PBR28 must be synthesized on-site. PBR06 (52) is a new,
TSPO-specific radiotracer which, because the radionuclide is
18
F, could be synthesized at another facility and shipped to the

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

351

PET center (as is often done with FDG). Although PBR06 is
not commercially available, this may be possible to arrange by
collaboration with a different site that has the ability to synthesize
(18F)PBR06. Using (18F)PBR06 does not allow multiple scans
in 1 day, due to the long half-life of 18F.
8. (From Subheading 3.2.3) (11C)PBR28 can be synthesized
using an AutoLoop™ module, which in our experience
increases radioactivity yield by 2.5-fold compared to the FxC
module. Dissolve the desmethyl PBR28 precursor (0.2–
0.4 mg) in dimethylformamide (80–90 μL) and treat with
tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (1.0 M solution in methanol).
Vortex the mixture and mix well. At 3–5 min before the delivery
of (11C)CH3I, load the solution into the stainless steel loop of
an AutoLoop module housed within a hot cell. (11C)CH3I,
prepared from a Microlab or an alternative generation device,
is swept into the loop in a stream of argon gas (flow rate of
30 mL/min) until the radioactivity in the loop reaches a maximum. Allow the reaction to proceed in the loop for 5 min at
room temperature. Flush the crude reaction mixture from the
loop with the semi-preparative HPLC mobile phase (32%
acetonitrile/68% buffer solution of 10 mM ammonium formate with 10 mM formic acid, v/v, at a flow rate of 3 mL/
min) onto a HPLC column (Onyx Monolithic C18,
100 mm × 10.0 mm, Phenomenex). The subsequent steps are
identical to the FxC synthesis described in Subheading 3.2.3.

Acknowledgments
The author thanks the following colleagues at the Yale PET
Center for valuable inputs during the preparation of this chapter:
Henry Huang, PhD; Keunpoong Lim, PhD; Jean-Dominique
Gallezot, PhD; Beata Planeta-Wilson, MS; and Maria Corsi
CNMT.
References
1. Morris ED, Constantinescu CC, Sullivan JM
et al (2010) Noninvasive visualization of
human dopamine dynamics from PET images.
Neuroimage 51:135–144
2. Innis RB, Cunningham VJ, Delforge J et al
(2007) Consensus nomenclature for in vivo
imaging of reversibly binding radioligands.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27:1533–1539
3. Semmler A, Hermann S, Mormann F et al
(2008) Sepsis causes neuroinflammation and

concomitant decrease of cerebral metabolism.
J Neuroinflammation 5:38
4. Iwashyna TJ, Ely EW, Smith DM et al (2010)
Long-term cognitive impairment and functional disability among survivors of severe sepsis. JAMA 304:1787–1794
5. DellaGioia N, Hannestad J (2010) A critical
review of human endotoxin administration as
an experimental paradigm of depression.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 34:130–143

352

J. Hannestad

6. Raison CL, Capuron L, Miller AH (2006)
Cytokines sing the blues: inflammation and
the pathogenesis of depression. Trends
Immunol 27:24–31
7. Bucks RS, Gidron Y, Harris P et al (2008)
Selective effects of upper respiratory tract
infection on cognition, mood and emotion
processing: a prospective study. Brain Behav
Immun 22:399–407
8. Janicki-Deverts D, Cohen S, Doyle WJ et al
(2007) Infection-induced proinflammatory
cytokines are associated with decreases in positive
affect, but not increases in negative affect.
Brain Behav Immun 21:301–307
9. Hermann DM, Mullington J, Hinze-Selch D
et al (1998) Endotoxin-induced changes in
sleep and sleepiness during the day.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 23:427–437
10. Reichenberg A, Yirmiya R, Schuld A et al
(2001) Cytokine-associated emotional and
cognitive disturbances in humans. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 58:445–452
11. Wright CE, Strike PC, Brydon L et al (2005)
Acute inflammation and negative mood: mediation by cytokine activation. Brain Behav
Immun 19:345–350
12. Eisenberger NI, Inagaki TK, Rameson LT et al
(2009) An fMRI study of cytokine-induced
depressed mood and social pain: the role of sex
differences. Neuroimage 47:881–890
13. Capuron L, Fornwalt FB, Knight BT et al (2009)
Does cytokine-induced depression differ from
idiopathic major depression in medically healthy
individuals? J Affect Disord 119:181–185
14. De La Garza R II (2005) Endotoxin- or proinflammatory cytokine-induced sickness behavior as an animal model of depression: focus on
anhedonia. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 29:761–770
15. Dunn AJ, Swiergiel AH, de Beaurepaire R
(2005) Cytokines as mediators of depression:
what can we learn from animal studies?
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 29:891–909
16. Pecchi E, Dallaporta M, Jean A et al (2009)
Prostaglandins and sickness behavior: old story,
new insights. Physiol Behav 97:279–292
17. Anisman H (2009) Cascading effects of stressors
and inflammatory immune system activation:
implications for major depressive disorder.
J Psychiatry Neurosci 34:4–20
18. Larson SJ, Dunn AJ (2001) Behavioral effects
of cytokines. Brain Behav Immun 15:371–387
19. Frenois F, Moreau M, O’Connor J et al (2007)
Lipopolysaccharide induces delayed FosB/
DeltaFosB immunostaining within the
mouse extended amygdala, hippocampus
and hypothalamus, that parallel the
expression of depressive-like behavior.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 32:516–531

20. Qin L, Wu X, Block ML et al (2007) Systemic
LPS causes chronic neuroinflammation and progressive neurodegeneration. Glia 55:453–462
21. Moreau M, Andre C, O’Connor JC et al (2008)
Inoculation of Bacillus Calmette-Guerin to
mice induces an acute episode of sickness
behavior followed by chronic depressive-like
behavior. Brain Behav Immun 22:1087–1095
22. Hannestad J, DellaGioia N, Ortiz N et al (2011)
Citalopram reduces endotoxin-induced fatigue.
Brain Behav Immun 25:256–259
23. Gosselin D, Rivest S (2008) MyD88 signaling
in brain endothelial cells is essential for the
neuronal activity and glucocorticoid release
during systemic inflammation. Mol Psychiatry
13:480–497
24. Ching S, Zhang H, Belevych N et al (2007)
Endothelial-specific knockdown of interleukin-1
(IL-1) type 1 receptor differentially alters CNS
responses to IL-1 depending on its route of
administration. J Neurosci 27:10476–10486
25. Dauphinee
SM,
Karsan
A
(2006)
Lipopolysaccharide signaling in endothelial
cells. Lab Invest 86:9–22
26. Magder S, Neculcea J, Neculcea V et al (2006)
Lipopolysaccharide and TNF-alpha produce
very similar changes in gene expression in human
endothelial cells. J Vasc Res 43:447–461
27. Kapas L, Hansen MK, Chang HY et al (1998)
Vagotomy attenuates but does not prevent the
somnogenic and febrile effects of lipopolysaccharide in rats. Am J Physiol 274:R406–R411
28. Opp MR, Toth LA (1998) Somnogenic and
pyrogenic effects of interleukin-1beta and
lipopolysaccharide in intact and vagotomized
rats. Life Sci 62:923–936
29. Konsman JP, Luheshi GN, Bluthe RM et al
(2000) The vagus nerve mediates behavioural
depression, but not fever, in response to peripheral immune signals; a functional anatomical
analysis. Eur J Neurosci 12:4434–4446
30. Reyes TM, Coe CL (1996) Interleukin-1 beta
differentially affects interleukin-6 and soluble
interleukin-6 receptor in the blood and central
nervous system of the monkey. J Neuroimmunol
66:135–141
31. Raison CL, Borisov AS, Majer M et al (2009)
Activation of central nervous system
inflammatory pathways by interferon-alpha:
relationship to monoamines and depression.
Biol Psychiatry 65:296–303
32. Bierhaus A, Wolf J, Andrassy M et al (2003)
A mechanism converting psychosocial stress
into mononuclear cell activation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 100:1920–1925
33. Pavlov VA, Tracey KJ (2005) The cholinergic
anti-inflammatory pathway. Brain Behav Immun
19:493–499

17

The Application of PET Imaging in Psychoneuroimmunology Research

34. Vida G, Pena G, Deitch EA et al (2011) Alpha7cholinergic receptor mediates vagal induction
of splenic norepinephrine. J Immunol 186:
4340–4346
35. Wienhard K (2002) Measurement of glucose
consumption using ((18)F)fluorodeoxyglucose.
Methods 27:218–225
36. Capuron L, Pagnoni G, Demetrashvili MF
et al (2007) Basal ganglia hypermetabolism
and symptoms of fatigue during interferon-alpha
therapy. Neuropsychopharmacology 32:2384
–2392
37. Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Landeau B, Papathanassiou
D et al (2002) Automated anatomical labeling
of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI singlesubject brain. Neuroimage 15:273–289
38. Tambuyzer BR, Ponsaerts P, Nouwen EJ (2009)
Microglia: gatekeepers of central nervous system
immunology. J Leukoc Biol 85:352–370
39. Block ML, Zecca L, Hong JS (2007) Microgliamediated neurotoxicity: uncovering the molecular mechanisms. Nat Rev Neurosci 8:57–69
40. Maeda J, Higuchi M, Inaji M et al (2007)
Phase-dependent roles of reactive microglia
and astrocytes in nervous system injury as
delineated by imaging of peripheral benzodiazepine receptor. Brain Res 1157:
100–111
41. Li L, Lu J, Tay SS et al (2007) The function of
microglia, either neuroprotection or neurotoxicity, is determined by the equilibrium
among factors released from activated microglia
in vitro. Brain Res 1159:8–17
42. Hanisch UK, Kettenmann H (2007) Microglia:
active sensor and versatile effector cells in the
normal and pathologic brain. Nat Neurosci
10:1387–1394
43. Pinteaux E, Rothwell NJ, Boutin H (2006)
Neuroprotective actions of endogenous interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) are mediated
by glia. Glia 53:551–556

353

44. Cosenza-Nashat M, Zhao ML, Suh HS et al
(2009) Expression of the translocator protein of
18 kDa by microglia, macrophages and astrocytes based on immunohistochemical localization in abnormal human brain. Neuropathol
Appl Neurobiol 35:306–328
45. Batarseh A, Papadopoulos V (2010) Regulation
of translocator protein 18 kDa (TSPO) expression in health and disease states. Mol Cell
Endocrinol 327:1–12
46. Venneti S, Lopresti BJ, Wiley CA (2006) The
peripheral benzodiazepine receptor (translocator
protein 18 kDa) in microglia: from pathology
to imaging. Prog Neurobiol 80:308–322
47. Rupprecht R, Papadopoulos V, Rammes G et al
(2010) Translocator protein (18 kDa) (TSPO)
as a therapeutic target for neurological and
psychiatric disorders. Nat Rev Drug Discov 9:
971–988
48. Brown AK, Fujita M, Fujimura Y et al (2007)
Radiation dosimetry and biodistribution in
monkey and man of 11 C-PBR28: a PET radioligand to image inflammation. J Nucl Med
48:2072–2079
49. Imaizumi M, Briard E, Zoghbi SS et al (2008)
Brain and whole-body imaging in nonhuman
primates of ((11)C)PBR28, a promising PET
radioligand for peripheral benzodiazepine
receptors. Neuroimage 39:1289–1298
50. Redl H, Bahrami S (2005) Large animal models:
baboons for trauma, shock, and sepsis studies.
Shock 24(suppl 1):88–93
51. Reader AJ, Visvikis D, Erlandsson K et al
(1998) Intercomparison of four reconstruction techniques for positron volume imaging
with rotating planar detectors. Phys Med Biol
43:823–834
52. Fujimura Y, Kimura Y, Simeon FG et al (2010)
Biodistribution and radiation dosimetry in
humans of a new PET ligand, (18)F-PBR06,
to image translocator protein (18 kDa). J Nucl
Med 51:145–149

Chapter 18
The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology
Research: A Review
Anna C. Phillips
Abstract
This chapter explores the reasoning behind using the vaccination model to examine the influence of psychosocial factors on immunity. It then briefly discusses the mechanics of the vaccination response and the
protocols used in Psychoneuroimmunology vaccine research, before giving examples from the research
literature of the studies examining relationships such as the association between stress and the vaccination
response. It also explores the ways the vaccination model can be used to answer key questions in
Psychoneuroimmunology, such as: “does it matter when stressful life events occur relative to when the
vaccine is received?” “what are the effects of prior exposure to the antigen?” and “do other psychosocial
factors influence vaccine response besides stress?” Finally, it briefly considers the mechanisms underlying
psychosocial factors and vaccination response associations and the future research needed to understand
these better, and indeed to use current and future knowledge to improve and enhance vaccine responses
in key at risk populations.
Key words: Caregiving,
Psychoneuroimmunology

1. Introduction:
Why Study
Vaccination
in the Context
of PNI Research?
1.1. Alternative
Approaches:
Enumerative Measures

Influenza,

Interventions,

Social

support,

Stress,

Vaccine,

There are many methods for examining the effects of psychological
factors on immunity. Early work concentrated on the influence of
psychosocial stress on enumerative measures of immunity. For
example, individuals exposed to chronic stress showed reduced
numbers of certain immune cells including reduced numbers of
B-lymphocytes (1, 2), helper T-lymphocytes (1, 3, 4), cytotoxic
T-lymphocytes (1, 5), natural killer (NK) cells (1, 5), and lowered
concentrations of secretory immunoglobulin A in saliva (6–9),
compared to matched controls. However, it is difficult to determine the clinical significance of such enumerative changes, given

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_18, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

355

356

A.C. Phillips

that they lie within the normal range for healthy participants (10)
and may simply reflect cell migration and recirculation rather than
increased production or better function (10). Additionally, cell
number changes could be a consequence of shifts in plasma volume
and hemoconcentration; in such circumstances, changes in cell
number would reflect increased density of a lymphocyte population rather than signal a true increase in absolute cell numbers.
Further, even absolute changes in cell number might not necessarily reflect alteration in the capacity of the immune system to mount
an effective response to antigenic challenge (10). Consequently,
measuring changes in cell number is perhaps not the optimal means
of determining variations in the functional capacity of the immune
system, and hence the likely clinical implications of psychosocial
variables for disease resistance and susceptibility.
1.2. In Vitro Measures

In vitro measures of immune function, such as cell proliferation to
stimulation with an antigen (foreign material e.g., bacteria), or cell
cytotoxicity (killing ability), have been argued to provide a better
indication of the functional capacity of the immune system (10).
These measures have been demonstrated to be susceptible to
impairment by chronic stress in many studies, e.g., (11–15).
Nevertheless, the isolated testing of any particular network of
immune cells provides only limited information about the overall
status of what is a highly integrated and complex system (10), and
an imperfect understanding of the relationship between psychosocial
factors and vulnerability to disease (16).

2. The Vaccination
Model
2.1. Benefits
of the Vaccination
Model

A clinically relevant model which examines the impact of psychosocial factors on the integrated response of the immune system to
a challenge would avoid these disadvantages. The antibody response
to vaccination provides us with such a model. Vaccines act as real
immune system challenges, although they are altered in such a way
so not to induce disease either by being inactivated or killed, or
only a component of the actual pathogen, so are really “imitation
infections.” Therefore, by measuring the antibody levels in response
to vaccination we can assess directly how well the immune system
responds to infectious challenge. It is also clinically relevant in that
antibody levels or titers are directly related to susceptibility and
resistance to infectious disease.

2.2. The Vaccination
Response

The vaccination response involves the coordination of a wide variety of immune cells. Antigen is initially recognized and presented
by professional antigen presenting cells, such as dendritic cells.
Thus presented, the antigen is then recognized by specific helper
T cells which process and present the antigen to B-cells, the antibody

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

357

factories of the immune system; this is termed a thymus-dependent
response. There are other types of vaccination which are also
recognized by B-cells without the necessity for T-cell help, thus
termed a thymus-independent response, which do not elicit as
strong or maintained a response as thymus-dependent vaccines.
A final type of vaccination, called a conjugate vaccination, is used
to improve the response to thymus-independent antigens by
attaching a protein to the antigen, which then stimulates an
immune response involving helper T-cell recognition.
When stimulated by an antigen, B-lymphocytes replicate and
mature into short lived plasma cells which produce the earliest antibody or immunoglobulin, IgM. In a primary response to an antigen
not previously encountered, the peak IgM response occurs around
5 days after vaccination. Interaction between activated T- and B-cells
leads to the production of high affinity or very specific antibodies in
bodily fluids: IgG (found mainly in the blood) and IgA (found
mainly at mucosal surfaces, e.g., in saliva). This more specific
response peaks around 28 days after vaccination. Other types of
antibody include IgE (part of the allergic response) and IgD. IgG is
particularly important, as being the most prolific antigen in the
blood and a more specific match to the particular antigen makes it
more effective at antigen elimination. Secondary antibody responses,
in which the immune system has been previously exposed to the
antigen, are more rapid and of greater magnitude; this is because
some activated T- and B-cells become long lived resting memory
cells, remaining in the immune system ready to respond quickly to
challenge with previously encountered antigens.
Not all individuals react with a strong antibody response to vaccination, particularly older adults who are only protected against
influenza disease in 30–50% of cases following vaccination (17–20).
Further, the increase in vaccination availability has not been paralleled by decreased influenza-related mortality (21). This variation
in the vaccination response allows for the investigation of other factors which might influence this aspect of immunity between individuals. The relevance of the response to infectious disease risk
provides the clinically relevant imperative to do so beyond the interest in increasing knowledge on how various factors affect immune
function. As well as age, psychosocial factors, such as stress, may
alter both the quantity and quality of antibody present at different
times after immunization, meaning that individuals suffering higher
levels of stress are more at risk of infectious disease.

3. Stress and the
Vaccination
Response
3.1. Stress
Questionnaires

The most common psychosocial factor examined in the context of
the vaccination response is stress. This is usually assessed via life
events checklists or perceived stress measures. Life events checklists

358

A.C. Phillips

consist of a list of major and minor life events, e.g., bereavement,
moving house, and usually require participants to indicate which
have occurred during the past month or year (22). Some also ask
participants to indicate how stressful each event was on a rating
scale. Life events have been shown to predict a variety of important
physical health outcomes, including infectious disease (23), and
mortality, particularly in the context of little emotional support
(24). In contrast, perceived stress scales measure individuals’ feelings
about how stressful their lives are rather than the direct occurrence
of events (25). Thus these measures are more susceptible to subjective bias, and are better predictors of subjective health outcomes,
such as angina, rather than objective outcomes, such as myocardial
infarction (26).
3.2. Caregiver Control
Models

Another common way of assessing stress in the context of vaccination is to examine antibody responses among those with a key
chronic stressor vs. a socio-demographically matched control
group, for example, older adults caregiving for a spouse with
dementia. The stress of caregiving has been shown to relate to
poor health and mortality (27), and can thus be considered an
important source of ongoing psychological stress.

3.3. Protocol for Stress
and Vaccination
Studies

In order to fully test the impact of psychosocial factors on the
response to vaccination, both pre-vaccination and post-vaccination
blood samples are required for assessment of antibody levels. This
is due to the impact that prior vaccination or environmental exposure to the infectious agent can have on pre-vaccination antibody
levels, and consequently post-vaccination levels. Without taking a
pre-vaccination baseline, it is difficult to state whether stress is
affecting the antibody response to a vaccination administered during
a research study or simply on the maintenance of previous antibody
levels. For example, in 37 nursing home residents, those who
reported higher levels of perceived stress had lower pre-vaccine
antibody titers to two influenza vaccine components (28). However,
it is not clear what this means, given that pre-vaccine titers could
reflect differences in prior vaccine history or exposure. In this same
study, social support was also negatively correlated with pre- and
post-vaccination titers against the A/Panama influenza strain yet
positively with pre-vaccination antibody titers against the A/New
Caledonia strain (28), making interpretation of the findings very
difficult. However, some of the early studies of stress and vaccination
in students were opportunistic, in other words they collected stress
data from students who opportunistically had already received a
prior vaccination. Although more complex to interpret, given lack
of baseline or prior exposure information, these studies are able to
show that psychological stress does seem to affect the maintenance
of antibody titers over time. For example, one study examined the
association between life events stress and hepatitis B antibody titer

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

359

in medical students, vaccinated either in the past 12 months or at
least 13 months previously (29). Whereas life events exposure was
not related to antibody response in the recently vaccinated cohort,
participants in the earlier vaccinated cohort who reported higher
life events over the past year were over twice as likely to show an
inadequate antibody titer as those with lower life events exposure,
providing some evidence that psychosocial stress can have effects
on the rate of deterioration of antibody protection (16).
3.4. Key Stress
and Vaccination
Findings

One of the most common vaccinations studied in the context of
stress and antibody response is the influenza vaccination, particularly in undergraduate student and older caregiver samples. The
influenza vaccination is a commonly utilized vaccine and consists
of three components or strains, usually two A strains and one B
strain, which change each year depending on the key circulating
varieties. A recent meta-analysis of 13 studies of psychological
stress and influenza vaccination concluded that there is a significant
negative relationship between psychological stress and antibody
titer following influenza vaccination (30). These studies included
five in caregivers and eight assessing the impact of stressful life
events or perceived stress. The meta-analysis concluded that psychological stress, however measured, had a similar negative impact
on influenza vaccine response, but that antibody responses to A/
H1N1 and B-influenza types were more sensitive to the influence
of stress (30). However, it is difficult at this stage to explain why
antibodies against influenza strains are differentially associated with
stress. One possibility is that strain novelty influences the associations
observed (10, 31), with more novel strains being more susceptible
to stress effects.
The impact on certain A-strains and on B-strains is clearly
shown in several studies of students. For example, those reporting
higher stressful life event exposures and/or higher perceived stress
prior to vaccination showed poorer responses to the A-strains of the
vaccine at 5 weeks (around the time of the peak response) and 5
months post-vaccination (indicating the decay in antibody response
over time) (32). This was replicated for the numbers and severity of
stressful life events prior to vaccination with the response to the B/
Shangdong influenza strain at both 5 weeks and 5 months postvaccination (33). Similarly, in a study of the effects of daily stress
and feelings of being overwhelmed during the 10 days following
vaccination, higher stress ratings were associated with lower antibody titers to the A/New Caledonia strain at both 1 and 4 months
following vaccination (34). In older adults too, we observed that
the stress of bereavement in the year prior to influenza vaccination
was associated with a poorer antibody response to two of the
influenza strains in a community sample of 184 adults aged 65 and
over (35). Although overall negative life events exposure was not
associated with vaccine response in this study, the effect found for

360

A.C. Phillips

bereavement suggests that stress is related to pervasive immune
effects throughout the life course, although what constitutes life
events stress will vary depending on the age of the sample studied.
Taken together, these studies provide evidence that stressful life
events both preceding and in the period immediately following vaccination can influence the antibody response. They also show that
both the peak antibody response at around 4 weeks and the decay
in antibody protection over time are susceptible to influence by
stressful life events.
On the whole, the vaccination response in older adults has
mainly been considered in the context of the chronic stress of
caregiving for a spouse with dementia. Studies have shown that
caregivers have poorer antibody responses to vaccination in
comparison to matched control participants (36–38). Similarly,
caregivers who exhibited repetitive negative thoughts about their
situation had lower antibody titers following influenza vaccination
(39). However, in younger populations, such as Multiple Sclerosis
spousal caregivers, there was no difference in antibody response to
influenza vaccination between caregivers and controls (40). This
raises the issue of whether the poor antibody response observed in
older caregivers is, to an extent, a function of an interaction
between chronic stress exposure and immunosenescence (41).
There is an alternative explanation for the discrepancy in
outcomes among the caregiver vaccination studies. Rather than
immune aging, perhaps it is the intensity of the stress experienced
that determines whether caregiving becomes an issue for immunity
(40). Dementia is a disease characterized by much more severe
cognitive and behavioral disturbances than multiple sclerosis
(42–45), and older spousal caregivers of dementia patients have
been found to report greater distress than younger multiple sclerosis caregivers (40). Further, the results of two recent meta-analyses
indicate that caregivers of dementia patients generally experience
greater burden and report more symptoms of depression than
those caring for non-dementia, e.g., cancer, patients (46, 47).
Thus, it might be hypothesized that, irrespective of the caregiver’s
age, caring for someone with severe cognitive and behavioral
problems will compromise immunity.
We have been able to test this hypothesis recently using a
caregiving model in younger adults; young parents caring for children with developmental disabilities. Dealing with severe cognitive
difficulties and behaviors that are problematic and distressing are
the main challenges of such caring (48–51). In our own studies of
30 caregivers for a child with a developmental disability (mainly
Autism) vs. matched controls, we have demonstrated that caregivers report high levels of stress, anxiety, depression, child problem
behaviors, and low levels of social support. These caregivers also
exhibited a poorer antibody response to a pneumonia vaccination
than parents caring for typically developing children at both 1 and

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

361

6 months post-vaccination (52). Of the psychological variables
considered, child problem behaviors mediated this effect. In addition,
within the caregivers, parents reporting more child conduct problems,
a component of the child problem behavior measure, mounted a
poorer antibody response at 1-month than parents reporting less
conduct problems (52). Similarly, these parents mounted a poorer
antibody response to the B/Malaysia strain of an influenza vaccine
at 1 and 6 months post-vaccination, which again appeared to be
mediated by differences in child problem behaviors (53).
These recent findings in younger caregivers reinforce the
hypothesis that an aging immune system is not a pre-requisite for
a poor response to medical vaccination in caregivers. Nevertheless,
among our parental caregivers, older caregivers tended to have a
poorer antibody response to B/Malaysia at 1-month, suggesting
that we cannot dismiss the hypothesis that chronic stress and
immunosenescence may have synergistic effects (41).

4. Different
Vaccine Factors
Vaccination studies also have the advantage of being able to incorporate research questions such as “does it matter when stressful life
events occur relative to when the vaccine is received?” and “what
are the effects of prior exposure to the antigen?” The next section
of this chapter will address some of these issues of timing.
4.1. Timing of Stress
Measurement

This issue of the timing of stress assessment has been developed in
studies of various vaccinations including hepatitis B, which is useful
in this context, as the vaccination schedule consists of three
inoculations over a 6 month period. The largest of these studies
examined the association between life events stress and the final
antibody titer in students, vaccinated either in the past 12 months
or at least 13 months previously (29). Whereas life events exposure
was not related to antibody response in the recently vaccinated
cohort, participants in the earlier vaccinated cohort who reported
higher life events over the past year were over twice as likely to
show an inadequate antibody titer as those with lower life events
exposure. This finding suggests that the immunogenicity, the ability
to induce a strong vaccination response, of hepatitis B vaccination
may initially override the influence of life events stress, although
there was also more power to detect effects in the earlier vaccinated
cohort as more participants exhibited inadequate antibody titers
(29). Nevertheless, this study provides some evidence that psychosocial stress in the period following vaccination can have effects on
the rate of deterioration of antibody protection (16).
In a study where a low dose of hepatitis B vaccine was administered, a higher stress index, comprising life events exposure and

362

A.C. Phillips

psychological symptoms, measured at 2 months post-vaccination
(thus considering the period post-vaccination) was associated with
a poorer final 6 month antibody response, and the stress index at 6
months also tended to relate negatively to antibody response (54).
However, as only the final antibody titer was measured, it is difficult
to determine whether, in this instance, stress predominantly
influenced initial formation or maintenance of antibody levels. Also,
the inclusion of psychological symptoms in the composite stress
index makes it difficult to ascribe this finding to any specific aspect
of stress (16). A similar study using the full dosage hepatitis B vaccination did not yield any significant stress effects (55), although it
is possible that this was due to the absence of a 2-month assessment
of stress, which was the main predictor of antibody response in the
previous study by this group. In a study measuring perceived stress
and anxiety during the vaccination period, i.e. post-vaccination,
these were not associated with the final antibody response to hepatitis B (36). Further, life events stress prior to vaccination and perceived stress at the time of the initial vaccination were not related to
antibody status 5 months following the initial inoculation in a more
recent study (56). On the whole, this would suggest either that
stress prior to vaccination is less detrimental to the antibody response
than stress post-vaccination, or that it is difficult to observe stress
effects early on with the full dose hepatitis B vaccination, due to its
immunogenicity. Given the findings with the influenza vaccination
and stress, this latter seems the more likely explanation.
In contrast to the studies of hepatitis B discussed thus far, one
study reported a positive association between perceived life event
stress, depression and anxiety during the vaccination period, and
hepatitis B antibody status 9 months following the initial vaccination
(57). This anomalous result has been attributed to the relatively
low levels of stress experienced by the participants in this study,
suggesting that moderate levels of life change stress experienced
during the initial stages of antibody formation may be beneficial to
the antibody response, although high levels may be detrimental
(57). Such an interpretation receives support from animal research
where moderate stress at the time of vaccination has been associated
with an enhanced antibody response (see e.g., (58)). This will be
discussed further in the section on acute stress below.
4.2. Primary
and Secondary
Exposure to Vaccine
Antigens

Vaccination with an antigen to which the participant has not been
previously exposed induces a primary antibody response whereas
vaccination against more common pathogens such as influenza
induces a secondary immune response. By examining the effect of
stress on both primary and secondary immune responses, we can
begin to determine which aspects of the immune response are most
susceptible to stress-induced modulation.
Hepatitis B vaccination has been used in this context due to
the vaccination schedule and the low likelihood of prior naturalistic

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

363

exposure to this pathogen. In an earlier study, individuals reporting
higher mean perceived stress and anxiety over the vaccination
period were less likely to have sero-converted (produced a protective antibody level) by the time of the second inoculation (36).
Whereas, an emotional disclosure intervention group did not differ
from controls in antibody levels at the time of the second inoculation
(59). However, psychological stress levels were not measured,
making it difficult to interpret these data. More recently, we have
used hepatitis A as a primary antigen. Students who reported a
higher number and severity of life events had a poorer antibody
response to hepatitis A at the 18-week, but not 4-week, follow-up,
suggesting stress can impact upon the maintenance of antibody
levels (60). Early studies using the vaccination model used novel
non-pathogenic antigens to examine the antigen-specific antibody
response. Keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH), a protein, has been
used in this context; the KLH-specific IgG antibody response was
lower at 8 weeks, but not 3 weeks, post-vaccination in participants
reporting fewer positive life events prior to vaccination (61).
The consensus of this evidence suggests that stress can influence
the primary antibody response, particularly the maintenance of
responses to novel antigens. It also supports the idea that life events
stress effects are more likely to be evident with novel vaccine types
(33). As discussed above, the secondary antibody response to hepatitis B vaccination has produced mixed results, but there appears
to be stronger evidence for a negative effect of psychological stress
on the secondary response to this antigen (16, 62), in line with the
findings for the influenza vaccine.
4.3. ThymusDependent Versus
-Independent Vaccines

A further advantage to the vaccination model is that there are
different types of vaccination, which can be used to help elucidate
which cells involved in the vaccination response are influenced by
psychological factors. Most vaccinations, which consist of inactivated
or dead viruses like influenza, induce a thymus-dependent antibody
response, as described above. A few vaccinations, however, protect
against bacterial infections or toxins, like meningococcal A or tetanus,
respectively, which do not require T-cell help. There are also conjugate vaccines, in which substances that elicit a T-cell response are
conjugated to a thymus-independent pathogen, such as a protein,
in order to boost the efficiency of the antibody response against
the thymus-independent pathogen. If psychological factors are
consistently associated with the response to thymus-dependent
and conjugate vaccinations but not with thymus-independent
response, this would imply that it is T-cells that are particularly
liable to psychological influence.
Indeed, there is evidence to suggest that stress may exert its
effects mainly on T-cells; we showed that higher frequency and
intensity of stressful life events were associated with a poorer
response to influenza and meningococcal C (following previous

364

A.C. Phillips

conjugate meningococcal C vaccination), but not to thymusindependent meningococcal A (33). Similarly, no association was
found between stress and antibody response to a thymus-independent pneumonia vaccination in pre-school children (63). However,
as older caregivers have been reported to show poorer maintenance
of antibody levels over time following pneumonia vaccination than
controls (37), it is possible that other factors such as age and severity
of stress may interact to impair antibody-mediated immunity more
generally than just the T-cell response.
It should be noted that in the study of caregivers and the
pneumonia vaccination, perceived stress did not differ between the
caregiver and controls, but there was a significant difference in
social support. This might suggest that thymus-dependent vaccinations are susceptible to the effects of stressful life events, but that
thymus-independent vaccinations are more vulnerable to other
psychosocial factors such as lower social support. There is some
evidence for this suggestion. In our own laboratory, we found that
social support, but not life events stress, was positively associated
with the response to a thymus-independent pneumococcal vaccine
in young healthy students (60, 64).
The comparison between thymus-dependent and -independent
vaccination responses suggest that both types of response are susceptible to psychosocial influence, but that there are key variables which
influence whether an effect on vaccination response is observed.
These include: the type of psychosocial factor studied (i.e. stress vs.
social support), and the age of the population sampled.
4.4. Acute Versus
Chronic Stress

Following on from the discussion above in Subheading 4.1 regarding
when stress is measured, such that moderate or less severe stress at
the time of vaccination might actually have a beneficial effect, it has
been suggested in recent years that acute (minutes or hours) stress
may be immune enhancing when experienced close to the immune
challenge. Such immune enhancement by acute stress would be an
adaptive mechanism, and might be regarded as an integral component of the fight or flight response, and circumstances that elicit
such a response are likely to also involve exposure to antigens and,
therefore, a robust immune response would be adaptive for survival
(58). Recently, our laboratory examined the effect of acute psychological stress on antibody response to vaccination in humans.
Participants completed a 45 min time pressured, socially evaluated
mental arithmetic task, or a resting control period, immediately
prior to influenza vaccination. An enhancement of the antibody
response to one of the influenza viral strains was found in women
in the psychological stress group compared to control (65).

4.5. Timing
of Vaccination

As well as the timing and duration of stress measurements associated
with the vaccine response, other behavioral factors have recently
been found to impact upon the antibody response. One such factor

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

365

is that of the time of day of vaccination. In our study of the effects
of psychological stress on vaccination responses in the 184 older
adults (35), we observed that the time of day of vaccine administration
significantly influenced antibody titer (66). Men responded better
in the morning than the afternoon; 41% of men showed a twofold
response when vaccinated in the morning vs. 24% of men vaccinated
in the afternoon. This effect was independent of current illnesses,
medication, vaccination history, and our reported findings of the
effects of bereavement and marital quality. Women tended to show
the reverse pattern. We have also recently observed the same pattern
in a study of younger adults’ antibody response to the hepatitis
A vaccination (66). However, these studies were not fully randomized, and there was little opportunity to examine the biological
mechanisms, such as cytokine and stress hormone levels. Consequently,
there is a clear and pressing need for a properly randomized
controlled trial of the impact of time of influenza vaccination on
antibody response and vaccine efficacy in older adults in a National
Health Service (NHS) setting. We are currently conducting a clusterrandomized trial of this sort within the NHS in Birmingham, UK,
and hope to confirm that a simple manipulation of the time of vaccination will improve the immune response against influenza in
older adults. This would yield an intervention, easy to adopt and
implement within the health services, at little or no added cost. The
benefits will be a decreased incidence of influenza infection and
influenza-related mortality in older adults.

5. Other
Psychosocial
Factors and the
Vaccination Model
5.1. Social Support

The support of friends and loved ones is an important determinant
of immune health, and is relatively easily measured in vaccination
studies via validated questionnaires. Studies have assessed both
functional social support, a measure of the quality and availability
of social resources a person has, and structural social support, the
number of friends a person can call on, in the context of vaccination. First, students reporting greater social support demonstrated
a stronger combined immune response to the third inoculation of
the three-dose hepatitis B vaccination (36). Second, loneliness and
smaller social network size were associated with a poorer antibody
response to the A/New Caledonian strain of the influenza vaccination in college students (67). Third, students with greater functional
social support showed higher titers to the A/Panama influenza
strain at both 5 weeks and 5 months following vaccination (33). In
older nursing home residents, social support was also negatively
correlated with pre- and post-vaccination titers against the A/
Panama influenza strain yet positively with pre-vaccination antibody

366

A.C. Phillips

titers against the A/New Caledonia strain (28), a finding which
even the authors were unable to explain. Along with the caregiver
study discussed above, these studies generally show that a lack of
social support has a strong negative impact on antibody levels
following vaccination.
Marriage is also a source of social support. In our own work,
older adults who were married, and particularly those who were
happily married, showed a better antibody response to the influenza
vaccination than those who were unmarried or less happily married
(35). However, more general functional social support and social
network size were not associated with antibody response in this
older population (35). These findings perhaps lend weight to the
suggestion that the population studied influences which psychosocial factors are important for the vaccination response.
5.2. Personality

6. Future
Directions:
Mechanisms and
Interventions

Personality factors, although often examined in the context of
health outcomes, again using validated questionnaires (see e.g.,
(68)), have scarcely been investigated relative to the vaccination
response. First, among a group of 12-year old girls, those characterized by higher internalizing scores and lower self-esteem at
baseline exhibited lower antibody titers following rubella vaccination (69). A similar concept, neuroticism, was negatively associated
with both the peak antibody response to the A/Panama strain of
an influenza vaccination, and the maintenance of antibody titers to
this strain in students (70). Among female graduate students, trait
negative affect/mood was negatively associated with the antibody
response to the second hepatitis B injection (56). Further, independently of negative affect, trait positive affect was associated with
a better antibody response following a second hepatitis B vaccination in graduate students (71). Thus, both negative and positive
traits appear to be able to influence this aspect of immune function
and disease protection. However, in exercising and sedentary
elderly individuals, dispositional optimism was not found to be
associated with antibody titers following influenza vaccination
(72). Inconsistencies in these results could be attributable to the
different measures of personality studied, or the different ages of
the populations used, which will now be discussed in more detail.

The studies reviewed above outline the different methods of examining associations between psychological factors and the antibody
response to vaccination. These studies show the strong associations
between psychological stress, other psychosocial factors and the
immune response to vaccination, such that stressful psychological
circumstances are associated with poorer antibody responses, while

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

367

positive factors such as social support relate to a better immune
response to vaccination. Taken together, these findings suggest two
main directions for future research. First, despite the range of vaccinations used in such studies, as yet little is known about the exact
mechanisms by which stress and other factors can influence antibody
responses to vaccination. Research incorporating a range of
measurements, such as stress hormones, immune system messengers
(cytokines), and the function of key cells in the vaccination response,
such as antigen presenting cells, would be necessary to further our
understanding regarding exactly how stress gets inside the body to
affect this clinically relevant immune outcome. Second, the clinical
implications, in terms of susceptibility to disease, arising from a better understanding of the relationships between psychological factors
and the vaccination response are important, particularly in the context of older adults who already display poor vaccination responses.
Psychological interventions to improve vaccination response in these
populations could include techniques such as stress management,
relaxation, cognitive behavioral therapy, and emotional disclosure.
Regarding such interventions, one study showed an improvement
in the ability of older caregivers for a spouse with dementia to mount
a fourfold increase in antibody titer following influenza vaccination
relative to matched controls, although the mechanisms of effect
were unclear and the intervention group was not randomly sampled
(73). Similarly, participants taking part in a written emotional disclosure
intervention, where they wrote about their emotions about a previously undisclosed stressful event, showed significantly higher antibody titers at 4 and 6 months following vaccination with hepatitis B
compared to a control non-intervention group (59). A different
clinical application of the vaccination model has arisen from the positive immune effects demonstrated in response to acute stress (65).
These preliminary findings suggest that the development of such a
behavioral challenge that could be applied in General Practitioner
settings could be a way forward for improving the vaccination
response. This would be particularly important for groups at risk of
infectious disease such as older adults, the bereaved, and caregivers.
At this stage, more work is required to establish exactly what types
of intervention in which age groups and are likely to be the most
beneficial for psychological, and hence immunological, health.
Behavioral interventions, such as the time of day of vaccination may
also be important in this context.

7. Conclusion
In conclusion, vaccination has had a substantial impact on public
health, although not everyone mounts a satisfactory and protective
antibody response to vaccination. This increasingly appears to be

368

A.C. Phillips

the case with progressing age. Studying antibody responses to
vaccination is now contributing to the understanding of how
psychosocial exposures can influence immunity and, consequently,
resistance to disease. The current challenges are to build upon the
methodology that has been developed through these studies to
unravel the underlying mechanisms and to develop and apply feasible behavioral interventions to boost the response to vaccination
and, thus, optimize our resistance against infectious disease.
References
1. McKinnon W, Weisse CS, Reynolds CP,
Bowles CA, Baum A (1989) Chronic stress, leukocyte subpopulations, and humoral response to
latent viruses. Health Psychol 8:389–402
2. Schaeffer MA, Baum A, Reynolds CF, Rikli P,
Davidson LM, Fleming I (1985) Immune status
as a function of chronic stress at Three Mile
Island. Psychosom Med 47:85
3. Futterman AD, Wellisch DK, Zighelboim J,
Luna-Raines M, Weiner H (1996) Psychological
and immunological reactions of family members
to patients undergoing bone marrow transplantation. Psychosom Med 58:472–480
4. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Glaser R, Shuttleworth EC,
Dyer CS, Ogrocki P, Speicher CE (1987)
Chronic stress and immunity in family caregivers
of Alzheimer’s disease victims. Psychosom Med
49:523–535
5. De Gucht V, Fischler B, Demanet C (1999)
Immune dysfunction associated with chronic
professional stress in nurses. Psychiatry Res
85:105–111
6. Deinzer R, Kleineidam C, Stiller-Winkler R,
Idel H, Bachg D (2000) Prolonged reduction of
salivary immunoglobulin A (sIgA) after a major
academic exam. Int J Psychophysiol 37:219–232
7. Jemmott JB III, Borysenko JZ, Borysenko M,
McClelland DC, Chapman R, Meyer D,
Benson H (1983) Academic stress, power
motivation, and decrease in secretion rate of
salivary secretory immunoglobulin A. Lancet
1:1400–1402
8. Jemmott JB III, Magloire K (1988) Academic
stress, social support, and secretory immunoglobulin A. J Pers Soc Psychol 55:803–810
9. McClelland DC, Alexander C, Marks E (1982)
The need for power, stress, immune function,
and illness among male prisoners. J Abnorm
Psychol 91:61–70
10. Vedhara K, Fox JD, Wang ECY (1999) The
measurement of stress-related immune dysfunction in psychoneuroimmunology. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 23:699–715
11. Arnetz BB, Wasserman J, Petrini B, Brenner SO,
Levi L, Eneroth P, Salovaara H, Hjelm R,
Salovaara L, Theorell T et al (1987) Immune

function in unemployed women. Psychosom
Med 49:3–12
12. Bartrop RW, Luckhurst E, Lazarus L, Kiloh LG,
Penny R (1977) Depressed lymphocyte function after bereavement. Lancet 1:834–836
13. Esterling BA, Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Glaser R (1996)
Psychosocial modulation of cytokine-induced
natural killer cell activity in older adults.
Psychosom Med 58:264–272
14. Irwin M, Patterson T, Smith TL, Caldwell C,
Brown SA, Gillin JC, Grant I (1990) Reduction
of immune function in life stress and depression.
Biol Psychiatry 27:22–30
15. Schleifer SJ, Keller SE, Camerino M, Thornton
JC, Stein M (1983) Suppression of lymphocyte stimulation following bereavement. JAMA
250:374–377
16. Burns VE, Carroll D, Ring C, Drayson M
(2003) Antibody response to vaccination and
psychosocial stress in humans: relationship and
mechanisms. Vaccine 21:2523–2534
17. Allsup S, Haycox A, Regan M, Gosney M (2004)
Is influenza vaccination cost effective for healthy
people between ages 65 and 74 years? A randomised controlled trial. Vaccine 23:639–645
18. Patriarca PA (1994) Editorial: a randomized
controlled trial of influenza vaccine in the
elderly: scientific scrutiny and ethical responsibility. JAMA 272:1700–1701
19. Goodwin K, Viboud C, Simonsen L (2006)
Antibody response to influenza vaccination in
the elderly: a quantitative review. Vaccine
24:1159–1169
20. Nichol KL, Margolis KL, Wuorenma J, Von
Sternberg T (1994) The efficacy and cost
effectiveness of vaccination against influenza
among elderly persons living in the community. N Engl J Med 331:778–784
21. Simonsen L, Reichert TA, Viboud C,
Blackwelder WC, Taylor RJ, Miller MA (2005)
Impact of influenza vaccination on seasonal
mortality in the US elderly population. Arch
Intern Med 165:265–272
22. Brown GW, Harris TO (1989) Social origins
of depression: a study of psychiatric disorder in
women. Routledge, London

18

The Vaccination Model in Psychoneuroimmunology Research…

23. Cohen S, Tyrell DAJ, Smith AP (1991)
Psychological stress and susceptibility to the
common cold. N Engl J Med 325:606–612
24. Rosengren A, Orth-Gomer K, Wedel H,
Wilhelmsen L (1993) Stressful life events,
social support, and mortality in men born in
1933. BMJ 307:1102–1105
25. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R (1983)
A global measure of perceived stress. J Health
Soc Behav 24:385–396
26. Macleod J, Davey Smith G, Heslop P, Metcalfe C,
Carroll D, Hart C (2002) Psychological stress
and cardiovascular disease: empirical demonstration of bias in a prospective observational
study of Scottish men. BMJ 324:1247–1251
27. Schulz R, Beach SR (1999) Caregiving as a
risk factor for mortality: the Caregiver Health
Effects Study. JAMA 282:2215–2219
28. Moynihan JA, Larson MR, Treanor J,
Duberstein PR, Power A, Shore B, Ader R
(2004) Psychosocial factors and the response to
influenza vaccination in older adults. Psychosom
Med 66:950–953
29. Burns VE, Carroll D, Ring C, Harrison LK,
Drayson M (2002) Stress, coping and hepatitis B
antibody status. Psychosom Med 64:287–293
30. Pedersen AF, Zachariae R, Bovbjerg DH (2009)
Psychological stress and antibody response to
influenza vaccination: a meta-analysis. Brain
Behav Immun 23:427–433
31. Gulati U, Keitel WA, Air GM (2007) Increased
antibodies against unfolded viral antigens in
the elderly after influenza vaccination. Influenza
Other Respi Viruses 1:147–156
32. Burns VE, Carroll D, Drayson M, Whitham M,
Ring C (2003) Life events, perceived stress
and antibody response to influenza vaccination
in young healthy adults. J Psychosom Res
55:569–572
33. Phillips AC, Burns VE, Carroll D, Ring C,
Drayson M (2005) The association between
life events, social support and antibody status following thymus-dependent and thymus-independent vaccinations in healthy
young adults. Brain Behav Immun
19:325–333
34. Miller GE, Cohen S, Pressman S, Barkin A,
Rabin BS, Treanor JJ (2004) Psychological
stress and antibody response to influenza vaccination: when is the critical period for stress,
and how does it get inside the body? Psychosom
Med 66:215–223
35. Phillips AC, Carroll D, Burns VE, Ring C,
Macleod J, Drayson M (2006) Bereavement
and marriage are associated with antibody
response to influenza vaccination in the elderly.
Brain Behav Immun 20:279–289
36. Glaser R, Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Bonneau RH,
Malarkey W, Kennedy S, Hughes J (1992)

369

Stress-induced modulation of the immune
response to recombinant hepatitis B vaccine.
Psychosom Med 54:22–29
37. Glaser R, Sheridan JF, Malarkey W, MacCallum
RC, Kiecolt-Glaser JK (2000) Chronic stress
modulates the immune response to a pneumococcal pneumonia vaccine. Psychosom Med
62:804–807
38. Vedhara K, Cox NK, Wilcock GK, Perks P,
Hunt M, Anderson S, Lightman SL, Shanks
NM (1999) Chronic stress in elderly carers of
dementia patients and antibody response to
influenza vaccination. Lancet 353:627–631
39. Segerstrom SC, Schipper LJ, Greenberg RN
(2008) Caregiving, repetitive thought, and
immune response to vaccination in older
adults. Brain Behav Immun 22:744–752
40. Vedhara K, McDermott MP, Evans TG, Treanor
JJ, Plummer S, Tallon D, Cruttenden KA,
Schifitto G (2002) Chronic stress in non-elderly
caregivers: psychological, endocrine and immune
implications. J Psychosom Res 53:1153–1161
41. Graham JE, Christian LM, Kiecolt-Glaser JK
(2006) Stress, age, and immune function: toward
a lifespan approach. J Behav Med 29:389–400
42. Keegan BM, Noseworthy JH (2002) Multiple
sclerosis. Annu Rev Med 53:285–302
43. Poser CM, Paty DW, Scheinberg L,
McDonald WI, Davis FA, Ebers GC, Johnson
KP, Sibley WA, Silberberg DH, Tourtellotte
WW (1983) New diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: guidelines for research protocols. Ann Neurol 13:227–231
44. Gregory CA, Hodges JR (1996) Clinical features of frontal lobe dementia in comparison
to Alzheimer’s disease. J Neural Transm Suppl
47:103–123
45. Neary D, Snowden JS, Gustafson L, Passant U,
Stuss D, Black S, Freedman M, Kertesz A,
Robert PH, Albert M, Boone K, Miller BL,
Cummings J, Benson DF (1998) Frontotemporal
lobar degeneration: a consensus on clinical
diagnostic criteria. Neurology 51:1546–1554
46. Pinquart M, Sorensen S (2003) Associations
of stressors and uplifts of caregiving with caregiver burden and depressive mood: a metaanalysis. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 58:
P112–P128
47. Pinquart M, Sorensen S (2003) Differences
between caregivers and noncaregivers in psychological health and physical health: a metaanalysis. Psychol Aging 18:250–267
48. Floyd FJ, Gallagher EM (1997) Parental stress,
care demands, and use of support services for
school-age children with disabilities and behavior
problems. Family Relations 46:359–371
49. Hastings RP, Daley D, Burns C, Beck A (2006)
Maternal distress and expressed emotion: crosssectional and longitudinal relationships with

370

A.C. Phillips

behavior problems of children with intellectual
disabilities. Am J Ment Retard 111:48–61
50. Higgins DJ, Bailey SR, Pearce JC (2005)
Factors associated with functioning style and
coping strategies of families with a child with an
autism spectrum disorder. Autism 9:125–137
51. Maes B, Broekman TG, Dosen A, Nauts J (2003)
Caregiving burden of families looking after persons with intellectual disability and behavioural
or psychiatric problems. J Intellect Disabil Res
47:447–455
52. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Drayson MT,
Carroll D (2009) Parental caregivers of children with developmental disabilities mount a
poor antibody response to pneumococcal vaccination. Brain Behav Immun 23:338–346
53. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Drayson MT,
Carroll D (2009) Care-giving for a child with
intellectual disabilities is associated with a poor
antibody response to influenza vaccination.
Psychosom Med 71:341–344
54. Jabaaij L, Grosheide PM, Heijtink RA,
Duivenvoorden HJ, Ballieux RE, Vingerhoets
AJJM (1993) Influence of perceived psychological stress and distress on antibody response
to low dose rDNA hepatitis B vaccine.
J Psychosom Res 37:361–369
55. Jabaaij L, Van Hattum J, Vingerhoets AJJM,
Oostveen FG, Duivenvoorden HJ, Ballieux RE
(1996) Modulation of immune response to
rDNA hepatitis B vaccination by psychological
stress. J Psychosom Res 41:129–137
56. Marsland AL, Cohen S, Rabin BS, Manuck SB
(2001) Associations between stress, trait negative affect, acute immune reactivity, and antibody
response to hepatitis B injection in healthy
young adults. Health Psychol 20:4–11
57. Petry J, Weems LB, Livingstone JNI (1991)
Relationship of stress, distress, and the immunologic response to a recombinant hepatitis B
vaccine. J Fam Pract 32:481–486
58. Dhabhar FS, McEwen BS (1996) Stress-induced
enhancement of antigen-specific cell-mediated
immunity. J Immunol 156:2608–2615
59. Petrie KJ, Booth RJ, Pennebaker JW, Davison
KP, Thomas MG (1995) Disclosure of trauma
and immune response to a hepatitis B vaccination program. J Consult Clin Psychol 63:
787–792
60. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Ferraro AJ, Drayson
MT, Carroll D (2008) Psychosocial factors are
associated with the antibody response to both
thymus-dependent and thymus-independent
vaccines. Brain Behav Immun 22:456–460
61. Snyder BK, Roghmann KJ, Sigal LH (1990)
Effect of stress and other biopsychosocial factors on primary antibody response. J Adolesc
Health Care 11:472–479

62. Cohen S, Miller GE, Rabin BS (2001)
Psychological stress and antibody response to
immunization: a critical review of the human
literature. Psychosom Med 63:7–18
63. Boyce WT, Adams S, Tschann JM, Cohen F,
Wara D, Gunnar MR (1995) Adrenocortical
and behavioral predictors of immune response
to starting school. Pediatr Res 38:1009–1017
64. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Ferraro AJ, Drayson
MT, Carroll D (2008) Social support is positively associated with the immunoglobulin M
response to vaccination with pneumococcal
polysaccharides. Biol Psychol 78:211–215
65. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Reynolds T, Carroll
D, Drayson M, Ring C (2006) Acute stress
exposure prior to influenza vaccination
enhances antibody response in women. Brain
Behav Immun 20:159–168
66. Phillips AC, Gallagher S, Carroll D, Drayson M
(2008) Morning vaccine administration is associated with an enhanced response to vaccination in men. Psychophysiology 45:663–666
67. Pressman SD, Cohen S, Miller GE, Barkin A,
Rabin BS, Treanor JJ (2005) Loneliness, social
network size, and immune response to
influenza vaccination in college freshmen.
Health Psychol 24:297–306
68. Smith TW, Glaser K, Ruiz JM, Gallo LC
(2004) Hostility, anger, aggressiveness, and
coronary heart disease: an interpersonal perspective on personality, emotion, and health.
J Pers 72:1217–1270
69. Morag M, Morag A, Reichenberg MA,
Lerer B, Yirmiya R (1999) Psychological variables as predictors of rubella antibody titers
and fatigue—a prospective double blind study.
J Psychiatr Res 33:389–395
70. Phillips AC, Carroll D, Burns VE, Drayson M
(2005) Neuroticism, cortisol reactivity, and antibody response to vaccination. Psychophysiology
42:232–238
71. Marsland AL, Cohen S, Rabin BS, Manuck SB
(2006) Trait positive affect and antibody
response to hepatitis B vaccination. Brain
Behav Immun 20:261–269
72. Kohut ML, Cooper MM, Nickolaus MS,
Russell DR, Cunnick JE (2002) Exercise and
psychosocial factors modulate immunity to
influenza vaccine in elderly individuals.
J Gerontol 57:557–562
73. Vedhara K, Bennett PD, Clark S, Lightman
SL, Shaw S, Perks P, Hunt MA, Philip JM,
Tallon D, Murphy PJ, Jones RW, Wilcock GK,
Shanks NM (2003) Enhancement of antibody
responses to influenza vaccination in the elderly
following a cognitive-behavioural stress management intervention. Psychother Psychosom
72:245–252

Chapter 19
Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune
Function in Psychoneuroimmunology
Victoria E. Burns
Abstract
Finding clinically relevant measures of immune function is an important challenge in psychoneuroimmunological research. Here, we discuss the advantages of the vaccination model, and provide guidance on the
methodological decisions that are important to consider in the use of this technique. These include the
choice of vaccination, timing of assessments, and the available outcome measures.
Key words: Antibody
Psychoneuroimmunology

response,

In

vivo,

Methods,

Psychological

Stress,

Vaccination,

1. Introduction
Antibody response to vaccination has received increasing attention
in the field of psychoneuroimmunology as a useful measure of
in vivo immune function (1–3). The immune system is a multifaceted network of organs, cells, and molecules, which continually
interact to recognize and eradicate foreign and/or dangerous entities.
To add another layer of complexity, there are also clear structural
and chemical pathways through which these immune cells and molecules interact with the neuroendocrine system (4, 5). Although no
single measure of “immune function” can profess to capture the
state of this system in its entirety, antibody response to vaccination
provides a useful model for studying integrated immune responses.
Strong evidence now exists that the magnitude of these responses
is associated with a wide range of psychosocial factors. Both young
and older adults who have been exposed to chronic stress have
poorer antibody responses to a variety of vaccinations (2, 6). Further,
reduced antibody responses have been found in participants with
higher rates of neuroticism (7) and loneliness (8), whereas both
Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_19, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

371

372

V.E. Burns

social support (9–11) and positive affect (12) predict better antibody
responses. There are also preliminary findings suggesting that both
chronic and acute psychological interventions can alter the efficacy
of vaccinations (13–15), indicating that antibody response to vaccination is a useful marker of immune function that is sensitive to
psychosocial influence. The success of its use as a research tool,
however, relies on careful decision making about the type of vaccination
administered, the sampling protocol, and the laboratory analysis.
This chapter will highlight some key methodological considerations
for researchers considering adopting this approach.

2. Advantages
of Vaccination
Response as
an In Vivo Method
of Measuring
Immune Function
2.1. Integrated
Measure of Immune
Function

2.2. Control
of the Timing
of Administration

In order to appreciate the benefits of a vaccination approach, it is
important to understand the immunological process involved in
producing an antibody response. The infectious agent, or antigen,
contained in the vaccine is recognized and internalized by professional antigen presenting cells, and then displayed on their cell
surface. Chemokines direct these APCs to the lymphoid tissues,
where the antigen is presented to T cells. If a specific T cell recognizes this antigen, and the necessary co-stimulatory signals are
present, it becomes activated and proliferates. These T cells are now
able to activate B cells that have recognized and presented the same
antigen. With this T cell help, the B cells can then proliferate and
become plasma cells which produce antigen-specific antibodies.
These antibodies can be measured in serum, providing a quantifiable
measure of the final product of this cascade of reactions (16). A successful antibody response, therefore, reflects optimal functioning of
a wide variety of immunological components, rather than a single
cell type or molecule. Further, the lymphoid organs are innervated
and immune cells are found by the nerve terminals (17), the immune
cells display receptors for many neuroendocrine products (18), and
there is considerable evidence that immune processes are dramatically
altered by this close interaction (19). Many immune assays are conducted in vitro, isolated from these influences, and therefore may
not reflect how the cells function in vivo (3). In contrast, as an in vivo
process, antibody response to vaccination occurs within this dynamic
neuroendocrine environment and, therefore, provides a much better
estimation of naturalistic immune functioning (2).
Vaccination allows the safe administration of antigen at a selected
time point, and the assessment of immune status both pre- and
post-exposure. This has clear advantages for study design and is a
further strength of the vaccine model. For example, by administering
a vaccine during or after participation in a psychological or control
intervention, it is possible to examine the immune effects of

19

Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune Function…

373

enhanced psychological functioning. Recent studies using this
approach have demonstrated that antibody response to vaccination
can be improved by mindfulness meditation (14) and cognitivebehavioral stress management (15). This careful control over
exposure can also be used to begin to understand mechanisms
underpinning the influence of stress on immune function. Miller
and colleagues conducted a study in which participants completed
daily stress questionnaires for 13 days before, during, and after
administration of the influenza vaccination (20). The strongest
associations between daily stress and antibody response occurred
8–10 days after vaccine administration, which suggested for the
first time that there may be a critical period during which stress
influences the antibody response.
2.3. Clinical Relevance

Antibody response to vaccination has clear clinical implications for
both vaccination efficacy and as a marker of susceptibility to infection.
Specific antibody level is the most commonly used measure of vaccine
efficacy in clinical practice and most vaccines are designed to maximize
this response (21). This is based on evidence that the greater the
antibody response, the better the protection against infection; for
example, the level of serum antibody against both influenza and
hepatitis B vaccinations has been associated with the extent of resistance to illness (22–24). As there is still considerable variation in
vaccine efficacy, particularly in vulnerable populations such as older
adults (25), interventions designed specifically to enhance antibody
response to vaccination may be particularly beneficial. One such
study was based on the proposition that, in the short term, immunological changes associated with the fight or flight response may
be beneficial, rather than detrimental, for survival (26, 27).
Participants completed a 45-min socially evaluated mental arithmetic task immediately prior to vaccination and showed augmented
antibody responses to the influenza (13) and meningitis A + C (28)
vaccines. These effects were apparent for sub-groups and strains
where the corresponding control group had relatively poor
responses, suggesting that populations with the greatest immune
impairment may benefit the most from these interventions.
Antibody response to vaccination can also be used as an indicator
of the immune system’s general ability to respond to an antigen. In
this case, the aim is not so much to understand how psychological
processes impact on vaccine efficacy per se, but rather to use the
antibody response to this one particular antigen as indicative of the
general way that it would respond to any infectious agent to which
it is naturalistically exposed. Early research, which focuses on the
effect of stress on self-reported incidence of upper respiratory tract
infections (29, 30), was hampered by the subjective nature of the
outcome measure and the uncontrollable variations in antigen
exposure that influence infection rates. One way to address these
issues is the experimental administration of live viruses, as with the

374

V.E. Burns

groundbreaking series of studies by Sheldon Cohen and colleagues
(31, 32). However, this is only possible in certain specialist facilities,
and cannot be conducted with vulnerable populations such as
pregnant women (33). In contrast, there are a wide variety of
approved vaccines that can be used to model individual susceptibility
to many types of infection.
As such, measuring the antibody response to vaccination yields
results that are scientifically robust and have easily interpretable
clinical implications for both vaccination efficacy and susceptibility
to infection. One caveat to add to this discussion, however, is that
studies examining the associations between both chronic and acute
psychosocial factors and antibody response to vaccination have
typically only reported small to medium effect sizes. It remains
unclear whether changes of this magnitude equate to substantial
alterations in disease susceptibility; elucidating this issue should be
a priority for future research.

3. Methodological
Considerations
in Using the
Vaccination Model
3.1. Choice
of Vaccination

3.1.1. Type of Vaccination
for Your Immunological
Question

Vaccines differ in terms of the type of antibody response they elicit,
the relative novelty of the antigen (i.e., whether the participants are
likely to have been exposed to the antigen before), and the typical
efficacy of the vaccination in the general population. Further, depending on your study population, some vaccines may provide more clinically relevant outcome measures. All these factors influence your
choice of vaccination, and each will be addressed here in turn.
The earlier section on the general processes involved in an antibody
response to vaccination actually describes a thymus-dependent
response to a protein antigen, such as influenza or hepatitis B. This
is the most common type of vaccine, and it was illustrated that
T helper lymphocytes are an essential stimulus for successful B lymphocyte proliferation and maturation to antibody-secreting plasma
cells. Other vaccines, such as those containing fragments of the
polysaccharide capsule that coats bacteria such as pneumococci and
meningococci, are able to evoke antibody responses without T lymphocyte help, and are known as thymus-independent antibody
responses. There is also a third type of vaccination in which a
polysaccharide antigen, that alone would produce a thymusindependent response, is conjugated to a protein molecule in order
to invoke a thymus-dependent, and therefore more robust,
antibody response. By comparing the relative susceptibility of
thymus-dependent and independent responses, it is possible to
begin to determine which aspects of the immune system are most
affected by psychosocial factors. For example, if an intervention
changes the response to a thymus-dependent, but not -independent,

19

Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune Function…

375

vaccines, this would suggest that the effect is likely to be due to
changes in T cell function. Alternatively, if all types of vaccinations
are equally susceptible, then it could be surmised that stress affects
more general processes such as antigen presentation or B-lymphocyte
clonal expansion and production of immunoglobulins.
The relative susceptibility to stress of these different types of
vaccines has only been systematically examined in a limited number of studies. Although there was initially some evidence that
stress was detrimental to thymus-dependent, but not thymusindependent, antibody responses (11), more recent research suggests that both types of vaccines are associated with psychosocial
factors (10). For example, caregivers of children with developmental disabilities, who are characterized by high levels of chronic
stress, showed a diminished antibody response to both influenza
(34) and the polysaccharide pneumococcal (35) vaccinations,
compared to parents of normally developing children. Whether
the somewhat less consistent findings in thymus-independent vaccines reflect a relative robustness to psychosocial influence warrants further attention.
3.1.2. Clinical Relevance
in Your Population

The clinical relevance of the vaccination for the prospective study
population should also be a consideration. While any vaccination
will act as a theoretical model of in vivo immunity, the clinical
implications are enhanced where the vaccine is carefully chosen in
order to reflect pressing concerns in the selected group of participants. For example, the influenza virus causes high levels of morbidity
and mortality in older adults (36) and, therefore, studies finding an
influence of psychosocial stress in this context have a particular
resonance. Similarly, examples of stress-induced decrements in
hepatitis B vaccine efficacy in medical students may have ramifications
for clinical practice (37). There are also ethical benefits to carefully
selecting your vaccine on the basis of clinical relevance; it is easier to
persuade ethics committees, and indeed potential study participants,
of the benefits of your research if you will be administering vaccines
that will be of direct benefit to your cohort.

3.1.3. Antigen Novelty
in Your Population

It is also important to consider the novelty of the vaccine antigen
in your population. The first time the immune system encounters
an antigen, it produces a slower, “primary” immune response. In
contrast, if it is a familiar antigen, a more rapid and effective
“secondary” immune response is generated. The three-dose hepatitis B vaccination course administered over a period of 6 months,
would therefore allow the assessment of the initial primary response
to the first vaccination, and then secondary responses to the subsequent doses. This could help elucidate which aspects of the immune
response are more susceptible to psychosocial influence. This model
assumes, however, that the participants are naïve to the hepatitis B
antigen at study entry. In the UK, this would be likely in most

376

V.E. Burns

young, healthy adults, as it is rare for them to have been exposed
to the blood-borne hepatitis B virus naturalistically and there is no
routine vaccination programme for those outside high risk groups
such as medical practitioners or drug users. However, in many
countries, hepatitis B vaccine is given routinely in childhood, and
therefore such a model would not be possible. This illustrates how
important it is to be aware of the vaccination and exposure history
of your potential cohort.
Some researchers circumvent the issues of naturalistic exposure
or previous vaccination entirely, by using a non-clinical vaccination
such as keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) (38, 39). KLH is a novel
copper-containing protein, derived from the giant keyhole limpet
mollusc. It is non-pathogenic and is not encountered naturally, but
when given as a vaccine it induces a pronounced primary immune
response in humans. This gives many advantages for study design,
as it is possible to give repeated doses and therefore control whether
you are examining a primary or secondary response; this allows
much more mechanistic studies. In addition, as a non-clinical vaccine,
KLH is not affected by changes in vaccine composition that hamper, for example, research using the influenza vaccination. At least
some of the three strains contained in this trivalent vaccine change
each year to reflect the current naturalistic prevalence of different
strains of influenza. This makes it difficult to conduct a study over
more than one season and combine the data, particularly if the analysis uses the absolute antibody levels, the magnitude of which will
vary dependent on strain. Although this can be dealt with statistically
to some extent, the use of KLH abrogates this issue entirely.
However, antibody responses to non-pathogenic novel antigens are
less easy to interpret in terms of their clinical relevance.
3.1.4. Vaccine Efficacy
in Your Population

The relative immunogenicity of the vaccination should also be taken
into account. Vaccines vary in their efficacy, and there is some evidence that this may affect their susceptibility to psychosocial factors
such as stress. For example, studies using the trivalent influenza vaccine often find that only one strain is influenced by psychosocial
factors (11, 20). It has also been argued that strains which evoke
robust antibody responses, i.e., are more immunogenic, are less susceptible to psychosocial influence whereas less antigenic strains are
more vulnerable to such effects (1); as mentioned previously, this
has also been observed in the context of acute stress and antibody
response to vaccination. As well as choosing an appropriate vaccination for your cohort, this issue can also be addressed by changing
the vaccine dose (40); this technique could be used to conduct a
more systematic examination of the relationship between vaccine
immunogenicity and susceptibility to stress. In sum, these various
theoretical and clinical implications, and your own research priorities, should be considered when the choice of vaccination is made,
in order to maximize the eventual impact of the study findings.

19

3.2. Timing
of Assessment and
Antibody Subclass
3.2.1. Baseline
Assessments

Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune Function…

377

One of the key benefits of the vaccination model, compared to
examining the response to naturalistic infection, is the ability to
measure the antibody status at baseline, prior to antigen exposure,
and then again post-vaccination in order to assess the magnitude of
the response over a set period. The baseline measurement allows
the researcher to adjust for previous exposure to the antigen; as
discussed above, this is crucial as pre-vaccination antibody levels
are a good predictors of the subsequent response.

3.2.2. Initial Antibody
Responses

The amount of time between vaccination and follow-up assessment
will, again, depend on the priorities of the study. Immunoglobulin
G, the main antibody subclass generated by vaccination, typically
peaks at 4–6 weeks post-vaccination; this has been the focus of the
majority of PNI studies. However, a novel vaccine will also elicit a
primary immune response, generating immunoglobulin (Ig)
M which peaks at around 1 week post-vaccination. IgM plays a key
role in clearance of infection by activating the complement cascade, and promoting an efficient neutralizing IgG response (41).
Recent research has demonstrated that social support is positively
associated with the IgM (9) response to the polyvalent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. In addition, chronic self-regulatory failure, in which individuals see themselves as failing to make progress
towards their goals, has been shown to be associated with the IgM,
but not the IgG, response to influenza vaccination (42); the clinical implications of such a finding for this viral antigen is less clear,
and these issues warrant further attention in a wider range of
vaccines.

3.2.3. Maintenance
of Antibody Protection

As well as early and peak responses, it is important to assess the
maintenance of antibody levels over time. When vaccinating
patients, it is assumed that the vaccine will provide long lasting
protection against the appropriate disease. In fact, there is considerable individual variation in the extent to which antibody levels
are sustained, and there are preliminary indications that psychosocial
factors may be associated with this maintenance. For example, a
study of two cohorts of students vaccinated against hepatitis B,
either within the last year or earlier than that, only found associations
between antibody levels and psychological stress in those participants
vaccinated more than a year ago (37). Similarly, a study comparing
pneumococcal vaccine efficacy between caregivers and controls
found group differences at 3 and 6 months post-vaccination, but
not at 2 weeks or 1 month (43). By assessing early, peak, and long
term antibody levels, the impact of psychosocial processes on different
aspects of immune protection can be investigated.

3.3. Outcome
Measures

The choice of assay is a more practical consideration that can impact
on the costs and labor involved in measuring the antibody levels.

378

V.E. Burns

3.3.1. Ways of Measuring
Antibody Levels
Hemagglutination Inhibition
Assay

A common and economical method for assessing the response to
influenza vaccine is the hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay.
Influenza virus particles are able to bind erythrocytes together into
a lattice-like structure, via a surface protein known as hemagglutinin;
specific antibodies inhibit this process. This assay compares the ability
of a range of serum dilutions to inhibit the hemagglutination. The
highest dilution of serum that prevents hemagglutination is the
antibody titer; for example, a serum antibody titer of 40 means that
hemagglutination was blocked at a dilution of 1:40, but not at further
dilutions. The HAI assay is a clinically relevant, widely accepted tool
for assessing antibody levels to influenza vaccination. These are
relatively simple assays that do not need specialist equipment beyond
that of a standard laboratory. However, the HAI assay is unable to
distinguish between different antibody subclasses, and must be
conducted separately for each vaccine strain of interest.

Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay

An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is a common
method used to assess specific antibody levels against a variety of
vaccinations. The relevant antigen is adhered to the base of the
small plastic wells of a microtiter plate and the serum samples
added. Any specific antibody binds to the antigen and the rest of
the serum is then washed away. Through a series of chemical
reactions, a color response is generated; the greater the antibody
concentration, the deeper the color. This assay is simple to perform,
and can be adapted to measure different antibody subclasses.
However, as with the HAI assay, antibodies against only one antigen
can be assessed at a time. As vaccines such as influenza and pneumococcal contain multiple antigens, assessment of the antibody
response to each strain can be time consuming.

Luminex

A more recent technological development are multiplex systems,
such as Luminex, which allow simultaneous assessment of the antibody response to multiple antigens. Instead of adhering the antigen to the base of a microtiter plate, the system uses up to 100 sets
of microscopic color-coded beads; each set can be associated with
a different antigen. A “cocktail” of relevant beads can be mixed
with the serum, whereby any specific antibodies will adhere to the
appropriate beads. Captured antibodies are detected using a biotinylated detection antibody and streptavidin–phycoerythrin (S–PE);
again, this can be modified to assess either IgG or IgM levels. The
sample is passed through the dual laser analyzer; one laser identifies
the bead, and therefore the antigen, and the other determines the
magnitude of the PE-derived signal which is in direct proportion
to the amount of analyte bound. Multiple standard curves then
allow this information to be translated into a specific antibody level
for each of the separate antigens contained in the vaccine. As psychosocial effects have largely been found with polyvalent vaccinations
where a number of similar acting antigenic strains are administered

19

Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune Function…

379

in one vaccine, this type of technology is likely to be crucial in
comparing the relative susceptibility of different strains.
3.3.2. Alternatives
to Antibody Response

Although antibody levels have been the most common way to assess
vaccine efficacy, both in PNI and the wider immunology arena,
there remain some concerns about how well they reflect clinical
protection against infection (21). There are a number of propositions
of alternate measures that could be considered, although the technology for some of the latter techniques remains in its infancy.

Serum Bactericidal
Antibody Assay

For vaccines against bacterial antigens, a serum bactericidal antibody
(SBA) assay can be performed. In this assay, serial dilutions of
human sera are incubated with appropriate bacterial target cells
and complement. Activation of the antibody-dependent classical
complement pathway ultimately results in lysis of the target cell.
The SBA titer for each serum is expressed as the reciprocal serum
dilution yielding 50 % killing as compared to the number of target
cells present before incubation with serum and complement (44).
SBA activity has been shown to highly correlate with immunity to
meningococcal disease (45). Although the only study to use this
assay in this context found no associations with psychosocial factors
(46), the clinical relevance of the measure would argue that future
studies should consider incorporating this sort of approach.

Markers of Cellular
Immunity

Although antibody levels are a key determinant of protection
against viruses such as influenza, the involvement of the cellular
immune system is also important in clearing the infection. As such,
markers of cellular immunity are likely to be a useful outcome measure for PNI research. One example is the assessment of ex vivo
production of Granzyme B in response to influenza virus following
vaccination, which has been shown to predict risk of influenza
infection (47). Similarly, flow cytometry techniques are being
developed that could be used to assess cytokine responses induced
by vaccines, and to determine which aspects of the response best
predict vaccine efficacy (21, 48). PNI researchers will need to keep
abreast of these developments in order to ensure that we continue
to use the most advanced immunological methods available.

4. Conclusion
Antibody response to vaccination is a useful measure of in vivo
immune function for PNI research. There is now a relatively large
literature demonstrating that these markers are associated with a
wide range of psychosocial factors, and preliminary evidence that
they are amenable to psychological intervention. The multitude of
methodological options to consider may be initially intimidating,

380

V.E. Burns

but this variety also provides the researcher with many opportunities
to tailor the studies to reflect their particular research priorities.
These strategic methodological choices enable further investigation
of underlying mechanisms of these relationships, and exploration
of the role of psychosocial interventions in augmenting antibody
response to vaccination. The results of these studies are likely to
have important implications both for improving vaccine efficacy
and as a marker of a more generalized improvement in immune
system function.
References
1. Cohen S, Miller GE, Rabin BS (2001)
Psychological stress and antibody response to
immunization: a critical review of the human
literature. Psychosom Med 63:7–18
2. Burns VE, Gallagher S (2010) Antibody
response to vaccination as a marker of in vivo
immune function in psychophysiological
research. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 35:122–126
3. Vedhara K, Fox JD, Wang ECY (1999) The
measurement of stress-related immune dysfunction in psychoneuroimmunology. Neurosci
Biobehav Rev 23:699–715
4. Ader R (2006) Psychoneuroimmunology.
Academic, New York
5. Segerstrom SC, Miller GE (2004) Psychological
stress and the human immune system: a metaanalytic study of 30 years of inquiry. Psychol
Bull 130:601–630
6. Glaser R, Kiecolt-Glaser JK (2005) Stressinduced immune dysfunction: implications for
health. Nat Rev Immunol 5:243–251
7. Phillips AC, Carroll D, Burns VE et al (2005)
Neuroticism, cortisol reactivity, and antibody
response to vaccination. Psychophysiology
42:232–238
8. Pressman SD, Cohen S, Miller GE et al (2005)
Loneliness, social network size, and immune
response to influenza vaccination in college
freshmen. Health Psychol 24:297–306
9. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Ferraro AJ et al
(2008) Social support is positively associated
with the immunoglobulin M response to vaccination with pneumococcal polysaccharides.
Biol Psychol 78:211–215
10. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Ferraro AJ et al
(2008) Psychosocial factors are associated with
the antibody response to both thymus-dependent and thymus-independent vaccines. Brain
Behav Immun 22:456–460
11. Phillips AC, Burns VE, Carroll D et al (2005)
The association between life events, social support, and antibody status following thymusdependent and thymus-independent vaccinations

in healthy young adults. Brain Behav Immun
19:325–333
12. Marsland AL, Cohen S, Rabin BS et al (2006)
Trait positive affect and antibody response to
hepatitis B vaccination. Brain Behav Immun
20:261–269
13. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Reynolds T et al
(2005) Acute stress exposure prior to influenza
vaccination enhances antibody response in
women. Brain Behav Immun 20:159–168
14. Davidson RJ, Kabat-Zinn J, Schumacher J et al
(2003) Alterations in brain and immune function produced by mindfulness meditation.
Psychosom Med 65:564–570
15. Vedhara K, Bennett PD, Clark S et al (2003)
Enhancement of antibody responses to
influenza vaccination in the elderly following a
cognitive-behavioural stress management intervention. Psychother Psychosom 72:245–252
16. Roitt IM, Delves PJ (2001) Essential immunology. Blackwell, Oxford
17. Felten DL, Felten SY, Carlson SL et al (1985)
Noradrenergic and peptidergic innervation of
lymphoid tissue. J Immunol 135:755–765
18. Sanders VM, Straub RH (2001) Norepinephrine,
the beta-adrenergic receptor, and immunity.
Brain Behav Immun 16:290–332
19. Nance DM, Sanders VM (2007) Autonomic
innervation and regulation of the immune system
(1987–2007). Brain Behav Immun 21:736–745
20. Miller GE, Cohen S, Pressman S et al (2004)
Psychological stress and antibody response to
influenza vaccination: when is the critical period
for stress, and how does it get inside the body?
Psychosom Med 66:215–223
21. Bolton DL, Roederer M (2009) Flow cytometry and the future of vaccine development.
Expert Rev Vaccines 8:779–789
22. Couch RB, Kasel JA (1983) Immunity to influenza
in man. Annu Rev Microbiol 37:529–549
23. Hannoun C, Megas F, Piercy J (2004)
Immunogenicity and protective efficacy of
influenza vaccination. Virus Res 103:133–138

19

Using Vaccinations to Assess In Vivo Immune Function…

24. Hadler SC, Francis DP, Maynard JE et al
(1986) Long-term immunogenicity and efficacy
of hepatitis B vaccine in homosexual men.
N Engl J Med 315:209–214
25. Grubeck-Loebenstein B (2010) Fading
immune protection in old age: vaccination in
the elderly. J Comp Pathol 142(suppl 1):
S116–S119
26. Dhabhar FS, McEwen B (1999) Enhancing
versus suppressive effects of stress hormones on
skin immune function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
96:1059–1064
27. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Carroll D et al
(2007) The acute stress-induced immunoenhancement hypothesis. Exerc Sport Sci Rev
35:150–155
28. Edwards KM, Burns VE, Adkins AE et al
(2008) Meningococcal A vaccination response
is enhanced by acute stress in men. Psychosom
Med 70:147–151
29. Graham NMH, Douglas RM, Ryan P (1986)
Stress and acute respiratory infection. Am
J Epidemiol 124:389–401
30. Meyer RJ, Haggerty RJ (1962) Streptococcal
infection in families: factors altering individual
susceptibility. Pediatrics 29:539–549
31. Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP (1999)
Psychological stress, cytokine production, and
severity of upper respiratory illness. Psychosom
Med 61:175–180
32. Cohen S, Tyrrell DAJ, Smith AP (1991)
Psychological stress and susceptibility to the
common cold. N Eng J Med 325:606–612
33. Christian LM (2011) Psychoneuroimmunology
in pregnancy: immune pathways linking stress
with maternal health, adverse birth outcomes,
and fetal development. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
36(1):350–361
34. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Drayson MT et al
(2009) Caregiving for children with developmental disabilities is associated with a poor
antibody response to influenza vaccination.
Psychosom Med 71:341–344
35. Gallagher S, Phillips AC, Drayson MT et al
(2009) Parental caregivers of children with
developmental disabilities mount a poor antibody response to pneumococcal vaccination.
Brain Behav Immun 23:338–346
36. Govaert TME, Thijs CT, Masurel N et al
(1994) The efficacy of influenza vaccination in
elderly individuals. JAMA 272:1661–1665

381

37. Burns VE, Carroll D, Ring C et al (2002)
Stress, coping, and hepatitis B antibody status.
Psychosom Med 64:287–293
38. Smith TP, Kennedy SL, Fleshner M (2004)
Influence of age and physical activity on the
primary in vivo antibody and T cell-mediated
responses in men. J Appl Physiol 97:491–498
39. Smith AJ, Bennett B, Vollmer-Conna U et al
(2002) The effect of distress on the development of a primary immune response. Psychosom
Med 64:166-Abstract
40. Edwards KM, Campbell JP, Ring C et al (2010)
Exercise intensity does not influence the efficacy
of eccentric exercise as a behavioural adjuvant to
vaccination. Brain Behav Immun 24:623–630
41. Baumgarth N, Herman OC, Jager GC et al
(2000) B-1 and B-2 cell-derived immunoglobulin M antibodies are nonredundant components of the protective response to influenza
virus infection. J Exp Med 192:271–280
42. Strauman TJ, Coe CL, McCrudden MC et al
(2008) Individual differences in self-regulatory
failure and menstrual dysfunction predict upper
respiratory infection symptoms and antibody
response to flu immunization. Brain Behav
Immun 22:769–780
43. Glaser R, Sheridan JF, Malarkey W et al (2000)
Chronic stress modulates the immune response
to a pneumococcal pneumonia vaccine.
Psychosom Med 62:804–807
44. Maslanka SE, Gheesling LL, Libutti DE et al
(1997) Standardization and a multilaboratory
comparison of Neisseria meningitidis Serogroup
A and C serum bactericidal assays. Clin Diag
Lab Immunol 4:156–167
45. Goldschneider I, Gotschlich EC, Artenstein
MS (1969) Human immunity to the meningococcus. I. The role of humoral antibodies. J
Exp Med 129:1307–1326
46. Burns VE, Drayson M, Carroll D et al (2002)
Antibody status following meningitis C conjugate vaccination is predicted by perceived stress
and psychological well-being. Brain Behav
Immun 16:173
47. McElhaney JE, Ewen C, Zhou X et al (2009)
Granzyme B: correlates with protection and
enhanced CTL response to influenza vaccination in older adults. Vaccine 27:2418–2425
48. Lash GE, Pinto LA (2010) Multiplex cytokine
analysis technologies. Expert Rev Vaccines
9:1231–1237

Chapter 20
Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology:
Methods and Applications
Qing Yan
Abstract
Translational bioinformatics plays an indispensable role in transforming psychoneuroimmunology (PNI)
into personalized medicine. It provides a powerful method to bridge the gaps between various knowledge
domains in PNI and systems biology. Translational bioinformatics methods at various systems levels can
facilitate pattern recognition, and expedite and validate the discovery of systemic biomarkers to allow their
incorporation into clinical trials and outcome assessments. Analysis of the correlations between genotypes
and phenotypes including the behavioral-based profiles will contribute to the transition from the diseasebased medicine to human-centered medicine. Translational bioinformatics would also enable the establishment of predictive models for patient responses to diseases, vaccines, and drugs. In PNI research, the
development of systems biology models such as those of the neurons would play a critical role. Methods
based on data integration, data mining, and knowledge representation are essential elements in building
health information systems such as electronic health records and computerized decision support systems.
Data integration of genes, pathophysiology, and behaviors are needed for a broad range of PNI studies.
Knowledge discovery approaches such as network-based systems biology methods are valuable in studying
the cross-talks among pathways in various brain regions involved in disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease.
Key words: Bioinformatics, Computers, Data integration, Data mining, Databases, Decision support,
Personalized medicine, Psychoneuroimmunology, Systems biology, Translational medicine

1. The Role
of Translational
Bioinformatics
in Psychoneuroimmunology

With the rapid development pace in scientific discoveries and information technology, biomedicine is reaching a revolutionary tipping
point that could lead to better understanding of health and more
effective preventive and therapeutic strategies for diseases. To achieve
the optimal health and wellness, multidimensional factors need to be
identified, including those from the behavioral, social, and biological
aspects (1). Stronger interdisciplinary collaborations would be needed

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_20, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

383

384

Q. Yan

to establish the biobehavioral-social-ecologic models of multilevel
systems including the molecular, cellular, physiological, psychological,
and environmental levels (see Chapter 1).
Studies in psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) may provide a
platform for the collaboration between different disciplines
including psychology, psychiatry, neurobiology, immunology,
and informatics. Systems biology is also an interdisciplinary field
across many knowledge domains including genomics, proteomics, physiology and pathology, pharmacology and toxicology, as
well as clinical medicine (2). Systems biology is a promising field
that studies the interactions among biological elements for the
thorough understanding of diseases at the various systems levels
toward personalized and systems medicine (3). With the new
approaches in analyzing biomedical systems, studies in PNI and
systems biology may offer novel preventive and therapeutic
strategies.
However, one of the most significant obstacles in the practice
of personalized and systems medicine is the translation of scientific
discoveries into better therapeutic outcomes. A critical factor in the
successful translation from the “bench” to the “bedside” is the
access, management, and analysis of integrated data within and
across functional domains (4). For example, most of clinical and
basic research data are currently stored in disparate and separate
systems, it is often difficult for clinicians and researchers to access
and share these data (5). Furthermore, inefficient workflow
management in clinics and laboratories has created many obstacles
for decision making and outcomes assessments.
With the current shift of research strategies from reductionistdriven approaches to systematic approaches for extracting information
from the whole system to develop hypotheses, informatics support is
becoming indispensable (6, 7). For example, many approaches have
been used for the elucidation of associated genes and potential
biomarkers in patients with schizophrenia (8). These approaches
include the analyses of relevant metabolomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, protein–protein interactions, neuronal cell cultures, as well
as behavioral studies. Such approaches have generated a huge amount
of data that need powerful data analysis and systems biology methods to analyze the complexity of the brain and behavior to develop
systems models for better therapeutics (8).
With such demands, it is urgent to develop novel technologies
for effective data management and integration, data sharing and
exchanging, knowledge discovery and representation, as well as
decision support. Bioinformatics uses computational approaches to
solve problems and improve the communication, management,
understanding, and analysis of biomedical information (9).
Bioinformatics methods will be valuable to enable the effective collaboration among experts including both scientists and clinicians.

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

385

For instance, informatics models have been suggested to help
psychiatric studies by establishing better theories that may integrate
psychiatry with neuroscience, and by enabling better testing of complex hypotheses against complex data via their powerful analytical
methods (10).
Specifically, translational bioinformatics can provide a powerful
method to bridge the gaps between various knowledge domains in
PNI and systems biology, as well as the gaps between the basic
research findings and clinical outcomes in translational medicine.
As defined by the American Medical Informatics Association
(AMIA), translational bioinformatics is “the development of storage, analytic, and interpretive methods to optimize the transformation of increasingly voluminous biomedical data, and genomic
data, into proactive, predictive, preventive, and participatory
health” (11).
Translational bioinformatics in PNI studies needs to integrate
multiple disciplines including general bioinformatics, neuroinformatics, immunoinformatics, health and medical informatics, public
health, as well as translational medicine. Neuroinformatics and
immunoinformatics have now become independent fields with rich
contents. Discussion of these two fields is beyond the scope and
length of this chapter. This chapter will focus on general translational bioinformatics methods and their applications in PNI studies, especially in behavioral studies and personalized medicine.
Translational bioinformatics may improve the integration of
clinical and laboratory data streams for a better management of
workflows for more efficient utilizations of healthcare resources
with lower costs (7). Applications such as electronic health records
(EHRs) and knowledge representation tools may facilitate the
share of information and help solve the system interoperability
problems. Such applications will also allow the establishment,
implementation, and compliance of various biomedical standards
in PNI studies.
More importantly, translational bioinformatics can promote
the practice of personalized and systems medicine with its decision
support functions based on the methods of data integration, data
mining, and knowledge discovery (7). These methods can help
with the reduction of clinical risks and the promotion of patient
satisfaction. For example, computer-based information systems
have been considered the most cost-effective and promising strategy
for preventing adverse therapeutic events and overcoming therapeutic resistance (12). Such approaches will empower scientists and
clinicians to design personalized strategies to bring the right interventions with the right dosages to the right people at the right
time. By improving communications among multidisciplinary
groups in PNI, better collaborations would allow more accurate
diagnosis and the optimal outcomes.

386

Q. Yan

2. Translational
Bioinformatics
Methods in PNI
and Personalized
Medicine
2.1. Systemic Profiles,
Patient Subgroups,
and Systems Models
in PNI

To achieve the goal of personalized medicine, informatics tools are
especially useful for the prediction of substantial disease subpopulations. Translational bioinformatics can facilitate pattern recognition,
and expedite and validate the discovery of biomarkers to allow their
incorporation into clinical trial design and outcome assessments (7).
These are important steps for understanding the mechanisms of
patient responses to diseases and therapeutics (13). Specifically, the
analysis of high throughput (HTP) data, the establishment of
patient systemic profiles, and the informatics modeling of molecular
or higher level systems would enable profound and novel insights
into the mechanisms of health and diseases.
For example, because genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have been unsuccessful in identifying risk variants in neuropsychiatric
disorders including schizophrenia, behavioral informatics for
analyzing multivariable behavioral profiles has been proposed (14).
Behavioral profiles can be used as phenotypes instead of traditional
“subtypes” of a disease. Behavioral profiles are an integrative and
quantitative abstraction of the emotional characteristics, personality,
and neurocognitive functions of each individual patient (14). Based
on the systemic behavioral profile, patient subgroups can be identified
for the further investigation of genetic risk factors. The associations
between different neuropsychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder that share similar clinical features can also be
discovered. In addition, the applications of such systemic behavioral
profiles may enable more powerful statistical analysis for exploring
the correlations at various systems levels. Analysis of behavioral
profile-based phenotypes will make significant contributions to the
transition from the single-measure and disease-based medicine to
human-centered medicine.
By integrating and analyzing complex data, translational bioinformatics can also help establish predictive models for the simulation
of interrelationships and interactions among the components of the
system (2). According to the systems biology paradigm, interactions
at various levels such as cellular networks are considered as dynamic
and self-organizing events in the whole system. Such models can in
turn help predict the behavior of the whole system, such as patient
responses to vaccines or drugs. Translational bioinformatics would
enable the identification of systems-based biomarkers, as well as the
understanding of systemic structure–function, genotype–phenotype,
and gene–environment correlations (7).
For example, in the field of psychiatric research, the development of systems biology models such as those of the neurons would
play a critical role for a better understanding of mental disorders
(15). Understanding the structural and functional complexity of the
brain has become the main challenge in studying mental disorders

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

387

from a system’s point of view. Some theoretical quantitative models
have been used for computer simulation to describe disorders
including addiction (15). Systems modeling approaches can be used
for studying systemic behaviors, signaling pathways, as well as
neuronal networks dynamics and circuits such as the prefrontal
cortical working memory circuits that are involved in schizophrenia
(15). Such approaches may be very useful for the elucidation of
spatio-temporal interactions in the PNI systems (i.e., the nervous,
immune, and endocrine systems) to develop novel and effective
interventions (15). Based on the identification of patient’s systemic
profiles and patient subgroups, translational bioinformatics can help
establish the predictive and systems models in order to achieve more
accurate diagnosis, prognosis, and the optimal therapy.
2.2. Translational
Bioinformatics
Methods at Various
Systems Levels

Different bioinformatics methods can be used for PNI studies at
various systems levels. At the molecular level, the genetic features
can be explored, such as the structures, functions, the connections
between them, as well as the effects of structural alterations on
functional activities. To study genetic structural features, approaches
can be used include the exploration of sequence similarities, patterns,
and motifs, as well as structures in two- and three-dimensions (2D
and 3D). Phylogenetic analysis by making phylogenetic trees can
be used to study the evolution of the genes. Specifically, bioinformatics programs such as BLAST (16) and CLUSTAL (17) can be
applied for finding structural and functional changes over time (see
Table 1). The tools PROSITE (18) and UniProt (19) are helpful
for studying genetic motifs, patterns, and gene families. The 2D
and 3D structural modeling such as using PredictProtein (20) and
PDB (21) can help understand the protein–protein and protein–
drug interactions (see Table 1). To study genetic variations such as
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), the International
HapMap Project is helpful for GWAS of patterns and disease associations (22, 23). Another tool for the analysis of SNPs is the
dbSNP (24) (see Table 1).
At the cellular level, many bioinformatics programs can be used
for studying the interactions and pathways, such as GenMAPP (25),
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (26), HPRD
(27), Reactome (28), and BioGRID (29) (see Table 1). The analyses at higher levels including the tissue and organism levels are
important for studying the genotype–phenotype correlations for
understanding diseases and drug responses, such as by using OMIM
(30) (see Table 1). The program of Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO) (31) can be used together with experimental approaches
such as HTP technologies and next-generation sequencing techniques. Furthermore, neuroinformatics and immunoinformatics
tools can also be applied in PNI studies (see Table 1).
For example, computational methods for candidate gene
selection and prioritization have been used based on the similarity

388

Q. Yan

Table 1
Translational bioinformatics resources for PNI studiesa
Name

URL

Applications

BLAST

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
BLAST/

Sequence comparisons

CLUSTAL

http://www.clustal.org/

Sequence alignments

PROSITE

http://www.expasy.org/prosite/

Finding motifs in a sequence

UniProt

http://www.uniprot.org/

Protein information

PredictProtein

http://www.predictprotein.org/

Protein 2D structure
prediction

Protein Data Bank (PDB)

http://www.pdb.org

Structural data

International HapMap Project

http://snp.cshl.org/

Sequence variations, maps

dbSNP

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/SNP/

NCBI’s database of SNPs

GenMAPP

http://www.genmapp.org/

Pathway tools

KEGG

http://www.genome.jp/kegg/
pathway.html

Pathway databases, tools

HPRD

http://www.hprd.org/

Pathways and networks

Reactome

http://www.reactome.org/

Pathways

BioGRID

http://www.thebiogrid.org/

Interaction datasets

Online Mendelian Inheritance
in Man (OMIM)

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim

A catalog of human genes
and genetic disorders

Gene Expression Omnibus
(GEO)

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/

Gene expression and array
database

Microarray Informatics at EBI

http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray/

Microarray data analyses

NHGRI Microarray Project

http://research.nhgri.nih.gov/
microarray/

Microarray databases, tools

The Neuroinformatics Portal

http://www.pharmtao.com/
neuroinformatics

Neuroinformatics resources

The Immunoinformatics
Portal

http://www.pharmtao.com/
immunoinformatics

Immunoinformatics
resources

Unified modeling language
(UML)

http://www.uml.org/

An object-oriented modeling
language

Gene Ontology (GO)

http://www.geneontology.org/

Genetic ontology

G2Cdb

http://www.genes2cognition.org

A neuroscience database of
synapse proteins

Phenowiki

www.Phenowiki.org

A knowledge base for
neuropsychiatric research
(continued)

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

389

Table 1
(continued)
Name

URL

Applications

Systems Biology Markup
Language (SBML)

http://sbml.org/Main_Page

For building systems biology
models

Systematized Nomenclature
of Medicine—Clinical
Terms (SNOMED-CT)

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/
umls/Snomed/snomed_main.html

A comprehensive clinical
terminology

International Classification of
Disease (ICD)

http://www.who.int/classifications/
icd/en/

Classifications of diseases

Logical Observation
Identifiers Names and
Codes (LOINC)

http://loinc.org/

Universal codes to identify
clinical observations

Digital Imaging and
Communication in
Medicine (DICOM)

http://medical.nema.org/

A standard for information
in medical imaging

Health Level Seven (HL7)

http://www.hl7.org/

Standards for
interoperability

Unified Medical Language
System (UMLS)

http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/
umls/

Terminology, classification
and coding standards

The Health Insurance
Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA)

http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy

About patient privacy,
security, and relevant rules

Healthcare Information and
Management Systems
(HIMSS)

http://www.himss.org/ASP/index.
asp

Information technology (IT)
and systems for healthcare

The Translational
Bioinformatics Portal (TBP)

http://bioinformatics.pharmtao.com

A collection of translational
bioinformatics resources

a

The sites were accessed December, 2011

analysis with known disease genes, the functional genetic annotations,
and the analysis of pertinent sequence motifs or signatures. The
application of such approaches in analyzing X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) resulted in a ranked list of candidate genes related
to the development of mental retardation, such as the genes APLN,
MAGED4, and UXT (32). Short sequence patterns and motifs
were analyzed to differentiate XLMR from non-XLMR genes.
Such approaches that combine gene annotation, sequence motif
analysis, and gene prediction methods are very useful for identifying candidate genes in PNI research.
In another example, by screening transcriptome data from
the GEO program associated with anxiety- and depression-like
phenotypes, potential biomarkers were found for anxiety (33).
These candidate markers include the dysfunction of carbohydrate

390

Q. Yan

metabolism, tight junction, and the phosphatidylinositol signaling pathways. In depression, features found included the dysfunction of gap junction, gonadotropin-releasing hormone signaling,
and ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis pathways (33). Both anxiety
and depression had features of dysfunctions of VEGF signaling,
long-term potentiation, and the glycolysis pathway (33). These
examples have demonstrated the usefulness of the translational
bioinformatics methods and the applications of the tools in PNI.

3. Translational
Biomedical
Informatics for
Decision Support
in PNI
3.1. Data Management
and Data Integration

Data are often complicated with various factors such as time,
heterogeneous sources, and individuals. Data integration is an
important step for the identification of biomarkers and for creating
predictive models of interactions. Because PNI contains knowledge
from multiple domains, the data integration process is especially
important. Data and workflow integration can help improve time
and economic efficiency, allow further data mining, and benefit
clinical outcomes. Data integration is critical not only for providing
data sharing and access, but also for pattern analysis, knowledge
discovery, and decision support (9).
Specifically, data integration is a process that removes errors,
resolves inconsistencies in the representation of data, standardizes
names and values, and integrates common values together (7). It is
an “evolution” process from “untreated” crude format to the
ready-to-use information. At the beginning of this process, data
are identified, collected, and chosen by screening all available
sources and selecting the ones that can best meet the requirements.
For PNI studies, different types of data from various knowledge
domains need to be selected and collected, such as nucleotide and
amino acid sequence information, expression data, protein–protein
interaction data, as well as behavioral data. Data sources can be
from high-throughput experiments, clinical practice, as well as
electronic systems. For example, a Web-based computer-assisted
interviewing (CAI) system has been found useful for collecting
data from those with mental disorders to provide valuable and
quickly accessible data for better clinical decision making (34).
Data are hardly clean. Based on concept extraction and modeling methods such as using the Unified Modeling Language (UML)
(35), the selected data need to be cleansed, validated, curated,
updated, and structuralized. Because biomedical data have a feature of volatility, i.e., the contents in the database may grow and
change over time, updates are needed frequently. Selected data
may have different formats from disparate sources. Common values in data need to be integrated together with a consistent and
unified format. Redundancies and inconsistencies are common

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

391

problems with biomedical data and need to be resolved (7).
For example, one gene may have many different names, such as
TAP1, ABC17, and ABCB2, which all refer to the same gene
“transporter 1, ATP-binding cassette, sub-family B (MDR/TAP)”
but may have different entries. Such redundancies and inconsistencies need to be solved by using genetic nomenclatures such as the
Gene Ontology (GO) (see Table 1).
For genomic studies, data merging techniques are usually used.
That is, various datasets can be concatenated in a database by crossreferencing the sequence identifiers. Another method is to integrate
multiple layers of data into one mathematical model, such as by using
a kernel-based integration framework (36). In such an approach, data
can be selected based on the relevant features from all available
sources, and integrated in a machine learning-based model.
Databases that integrate various data of genes, proteins,
pathophysiology, anatomy, and behaviors are needed for a broad
range of PNI studies. One approach is to develop a general Webbased data infrastructure. For example, G2Cdb is a neuroscience database focusing on the role of synapse proteins in physiology and diseases
((37), also see Table 1). The database contains data from proteomic
mass spectroscopy of signaling pathways. Using automated textmining and human curation methods, the database extracted information from published neurobiological studies relevant to synaptic
signaling electrophysiology and diseases influenced by mutations in
synaptic genes (37). Such datasets may be useful for correlating genotypes in the brain-signaling with phenotypes in diseases.
Based on the human genome project, significant amount of data
and knowledge have been collected at the genomic level. However,
higher-level knowledge bases that connect genotypes and phenotypes are underdeveloped, such as those for the complex neuropsychiatric symptoms, cognitive functions, and neural systems
phenotypes. Some efforts have been made to bridge such gaps, such
as a knowledge base for neuropsychiatric research ((38), also see
Table 1). The knowledge base focuses on the features of specific
cognitive tasks and prioritizes endophenotypes for translational
research. Such integrative databases or knowledge bases can help
with the analysis of genome-wide expression microarray datasets by
using methods such as variance analysis, correlation analysis, and
functional annotation tools (39).
Some advanced computational techniques can also be very
beneficial. For instance, a data warehouse can be useful to provide
a unified platform for data curation (5). Data warehousing is the
technique to combine and integrate data from different sources
into a common format. It is a collection of subject-oriented databases, and designed exclusively for decision support purposes (30).
Further developments of the bioinformatics capability are still
needed to provide adequate support for the rapidly increasing data
and knowledge in PNI and other biomedical fields.

392

Q. Yan

3.2. Data
Standardization,
Ontology,
and Knowledge
Representation

Standardization techniques including semantic mapping are needed
for better communication and data exchanging in both laboratory
and clinical settings. Standardization is valuable for solving the
interoperability problems among heterogeneous scientific and clinical systems. Such approaches are necessary for decision support in
biomarker discovery and making predictive models.
Extensive biomedical and technical standards can be used for
translational bioinformatics applications in PNI, including those
for genomic data, imaging data, and clinical data. For example, for
clinical data, standards such as Systematized Nomenclature of
Medicine—Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) and the International
Classification of Disease (ICD) are often used (see Table 1). For
laboratory data, the universal codes to identify laboratory observations (LOINC) can be used. For imaging data such as the neuroimaging analyses, Digital Imaging and Communications in
Medicine (DICOM) is useful. For genomic data, nomenclature
references including the GO can be applied (see Table 1). For
building genetic pathways and systems biology models, the Systems
Biology Markup Language (SBML) can be useful (40). Some
organizations such as HL7 also provide standards for solving
interoperability problems (see Table 1). One integrative platform,
the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) integrates various
terminology and coding sources and serves as a reference system
(see Table 1).
Besides cleaning and standardization, another important step
for data integration and decision support is data structuralizing.
Structured data and information enables rapid and efficient access
and retrieval, as well as automated processing (41). It would also
facilitate the integration with general information systems such as
EHRs. Structured information and knowledge presentation methods such as using ontologies may reduce the complexity of text
processing and improve searching performance.
Data integration and knowledge representation are essential
elements in building computerized decision support systems
(CDSS) to be used by researchers, clinicians, and the general public.
Knowledge representation refers to the expression of knowledge in
a format that can be explained and reasoned with by humans and
machines (42). Knowledge representation can be achieved via data
modeling and the building of multidimensional databases (35). As
a useful method, ontology studies concept definitions in a domain
and the associations among the concepts. For example, documents
can be pre-indexed by a conceptual hierarchy to facilitate conceptbased search (43). Ontologies have been used to represent clinical
guidelines and biomedical facts. These approaches can help transform biomedical data into useful information for decision support
in clinical practice.
Ontology-based computational network model can be used for
analyzing large-scale genetic association data for complex diseases

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

393

and phenotypes (44). Such models can embrace knowledge from
various levels including molecules, cellular pathways, complex
behavioral phenotypes, and environmental factors. By representing
complex scientific theories, these models can be used to support
interdisciplinary research and facilitate meta-analysis in PNI. Such
approaches will enable the analysis of potential interactions and
disease risk factors, and support causal modeling (44).
For example, EHRs usually contain rich data sources for
translational studies in personalized medicine. Phenotypic data of
patients can be collected in a systematic manner. The structured
record data from EHRs can be used for generating fine-grained
patient stratification and disease statistics. For instance, using
ontology methods such as one based on the ICD standard, records
from a psychiatric hospital were used for the identification of disease correlations to be mapped to systems biology frameworks
(45). In another example, cognitively motivated methodology has
been applied for the simulation of expert ability to support diagnostic hypotheses. Using semantic distance measures, diagnostically meaningful clusters can be modeled as geometric structures
within the semantic space that relate psychiatric terms (46).
3.3. Data Mining,
Neural Networks,
and Knowledge
Discovery

Based on the collected and integrated data, knowledge discovery
approaches such as data mining and machine learning methods
can be used for the discovery of meaningful patterns, associations,
interactions, and clinical rules to build systems biology models
(7). Data mining methods include clustering, decision trees,
genetic algorithms, artificial neural networks (ANN), Bayesian
networks, and various statistical methods (7). The detailed description of each of the methods is beyond the scope and length of this
chapter. This section focuses on their applications in PNI and relevant studies.
For instance, translational bioinformatics and systems biology
analyses have been found useful for elucidating the systemic mechanisms in inflammation. Dynamic mathematical modeling methods such as agent-based modeling (ABM) and equation-based
modeling (EBM) have been used for such analysis (47).
Immunoinformatics tools based on ANN methods can be applied
for analyzing structural and functional patterns of the immune system (48). Furthermore, text mining and natural language processing (NLP) techniques can be useful for better searching and
retrieval of health information (49). The clustering of expression
data at both the gene and protein levels can help identify biomarkers and candidate targets (7).
Some methods can be used specifically for personalized medicine. For example, dynamic p-technique (DPT) is a useful statistical
method for finding associations in dynamic constructs in a single
person or small group of individuals over time. Its applications in a
pediatric psychology area have demonstrated its usefulness because

394

Q. Yan

of its power in modeling repeated observations from small samples
(50). Using statistical methods, GWAS can be used for the study of
genotype–phenotype correlations based on data-driven rather than
hypothesis-driven approaches. Combined with informatics methods, the studies of structural genetic variation and the approaches
targeting rare genetic variation using the whole-genome “deep”
sequencing technologies may provide better understanding of
genetic epidemiology (51). These new methods including epigenetic studies and gene–gene interactions in complex networks using
systems biology approaches have great potentials to lead to novel
treatments.
One systems biology approach to study complex diseases is via
the understanding of simple nonlinear interactions of a very small
number of variables (52). For example, circuit diagrams may be
used to illustrate the macro-anatomic structures and links of the
brain associated with major depression and other mental problems
(52). Computational models can be especially useful for modeling
inter- and intracellular molecular networks such as the complex
systems of synapses involved in the mental disorders (53).
An important challenge in systems biology is the quantification
of experimentally induced changes in biological pathways such as
multiple metabolic pathways. The algorithm based on the
Generalized Singular Value Decomposition (GSVD) has been
found useful for analyzing pairs of networks for studying changed
metabolic pathways from those found in the database of KEGG
(54). Such an approach can be applied for analyzing differences in
clusters, such as in the quantification of the changes in metabolic
pathways between two groups in the studies of schizophrenia.
In another example, a network-based systems biology approach
has been found valuable in studying the cross-talks among pathways in various brain regions involved in Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
(55). By building a network of pathways, the associations among
AD pathways and the neighbor pathways can be systematically
studied and visually illustrated. By using such approaches, the
neighbor pathways of AD have been found important in the AD
progression (55).
3.4. Clinical
Applications
of Biomedical Decision
Support Systems

Decision support systems (DSSs) based on translational bioinformatics can be incorporated into EHR systems and other clinical
information systems. Here decision support includes information
management, diagnostic decisions, as well as providing patientspecific recommendations for prevention and treatment (42). In
addition, effective decision support means better communication
and documentation, more efficient workflow, and more convenient
literature and resource retrieval.
The goal of such decision support is to bring the “right knowledge to the right people in the right form at the right time” (56).
Workflow integration is a critical component toward the success of

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

395

decision support (42). A widely used methodology for modeling
the workflow and decision support processes is a standard objectoriented modeling language, the UML (35, 42). By using a methodology specifically designed for biomedical sciences, UML can be
applied for the modeling of biomedical knowledge to facilitate
concept extraction as well as sharing of knowledge (35).
The analysis of the decision making process of human experts
has been considered useful for personalized care in psychiatric
rehabilitation by matching diverse treatment options to individually unique profiles (57). Computerized clinical decision support
systems (CDSSs) that integrate databases, domain ontology, and
problem-solving algorithms can be applied for personalized psychiatric rehabilitation and optimized outcome. CDSSs have been
demonstrated valuable in improving medication safety such as by
analyzing clinical relevance of drug interactions (58).
For example, a CDSS and a multidimensional classification system
containing the Operational Classification of Drug Interactions
(ORCA) were used in analyzing 359,207 cross-sectional prescriptions in a large sample of psychiatric patients (58). Danger interaction alerts were issued by the CDSS, which were further analyzed
by ORCA reclassification. A total of 151 contraindicated and 4,099
provisionally contraindicated prescriptions were identified, with
detailed categorical information on recommended management
and risks related to interactions (58). Such approaches may provide
efficient solutions for identifying drug interactions in large prescription
datasets to decrease potentially harmful drug interactions.
EHR systems with large volumes of patient data can be used
for Comparative Effectiveness Research (CER). CER may help
identify the effectiveness and risks of different treatment options
based on data from patient subsets with similar medical conditions
(59). However, the data in EHR system are usually not ready for
rapid explanation of therapeutic outcomes. Decision support tools
can be very useful to help with the clinical decision-making process
and personalized patient care. For example, visual analytics tools
have been found effective for CER-based clinical decision support,
especially in the analyses of the effectiveness and risks of different
treatment options for different patient subgroups (59).
In addition, DSSs can also be used for improving consumer
decisions and behavioral interventions. For example, DSS is a sustainable method for supporting the decision process of both consumers and providers by improving communications and promoting
involvement for better health outcomes (60). Such systems may
help clients develop their own care plans and discuss with their case
managers. In addition, DSSs such as a Web-based system have been
found useful for promoting the motivation to quit smoking and for
cessation treatment in patients with severe mental illnesses (61).
Computerized administration of the mental health-related questionnaires may support efficient outcomes assessment, adaptable

396

Q. Yan

research network, and promotion of clinical impact in community
mental health agencies (62). For example, a computer mousetracking method for evaluating mental processes in psychological
tasks in real time may enable the measurements of spatial attraction,
complexity, velocity, and acceleration (63).
In fact, computer-assisted behavioral therapies have been suggested as a small revolution in mental health care as they may provide a new and cost-effective method for individuals with psychiatric
disorders (64). This approach may allow access to psychiatric care
by many individuals with the extension of the time and expertise of
clinicians. Computer-aided psychotherapy (CP) systems have been
found effective in improving common mental health problems
(65). For example, cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is an effective non-pharmacological intervention for mental disorders including anxiety and depression. Because of treatment availability and
cost, many patients with mental problems are unable to get help.
Computer-assisted CBT (cCBT) can be applied to help solve such
difficulties (66). For better outcomes using such therapies, it is still
necessary to identify more effective approaches and to manage
possible adverse effects. In addition, more consistent standards for
methodological quality will be needed (67).

4. Conclusion
and Future
Perspectives

In order to allow the smooth practice of translational bioinformatics,
societal and ethical issues should also be addressed. For example, the
networks such as the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics
Network (eMERGE) have emphasized the relevant ethical, social,
legal, and policy issues (68). The Genetic Information
Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) was established to “protect Americans
against discrimination based on their genetic information when it
comes to health insurance and employment” (69). The Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) (70) needs to
be complied for the protection of patient privacy and confidentiality
(see Table 1).
An enhanced capacity in translational bioinformatics may accelerate the revolutionary process toward personalized and systems
medicine. Such developments may also create an environment for
applying evidence-based principles from behavioral medicine (71).
The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical
Health Act of 2009 may help support this evolution. For example,
data analyses by using informatics tools have been suggested to
accelerate the discoveries in psycho-oncology and treatment of
cancer by changing the behavioral settings (71). In addition, the
goal of Human Connectome Project (HCP) is to collect and analyze
connectivity data as well as neuroimaging, behavioral, and genetic

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

397

data from more than 1,000 healthy adults (72). The project tries
to provide a resource for neuroscience studies for the understanding
of the brain functions in different individuals. The HCP consortium
is building an informatics platform and workbench for data
management, data sharing, systematic data analysis and data mining,
as well as data visualization (72). The platform will use standard
data formats with application programming interfaces (APIs) for
data utilization and integration of applications (72).
In summary, translational bioinformatics plays an essential role in
transforming PNI into personalized medicine. It would enable the
identification of biomarkers based on systemic analyses. It can improve
the understanding of correlations between genotypes and phenotypes
to establish patient systemic profiles such as behavioral profiles.
It would also enable novel insights into the interactions and interrelationships among different parts in a whole system to establish
predictive models for patient responses to diseases, vaccines, and
drugs. In addition, translational bioinformatics methods based on
data integration, data mining, and knowledge representation can
provide decision support for both researchers and clinicians. These
approaches are crucial for understanding PNI mechanisms at systems
levels, and for the development of personalized and optimal treatment
strategies. Specifically, translational bioinformatics may contribute
significantly to the development of health information systems
including EHRs. Such systems should be able to collect and manage
both clinical and genetic data, as well as to support data analyses and
decision making. However, currently commonly accepted EHR programs with these features are still in demand. Further developments
are needed in translational bioinformatics to meet these requests.
References
1. Mabry PL, Olster DH, Morgan GD et al (2008)
Interdisciplinarity and systems science to improve
population health: a view from the NIH Office
of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research. Am J
Prev Med 35(2 suppl):S211–S224
2. Yan Q (2008) The integration of personalized
and systems medicine: bioinformatics support
for pharmacogenomics and drug discovery.
Methods Mol Biol 448:1–19
3. Yan Q (2005) Pharmacogenomics and systems
biology of membrane transporters. Mol
Biotechnol 29:75–88
4. Madhavan S, Zenklusen JC et al (2009)
Rembrandt: helping personalized medicine
become a reality through integrative translational research. Mol Cancer Res 7:157–167
5. Wang X, Liu L, Fackenthal J et al (2009)
Translational integrity and continuity: personalized biomedical data integration. J Biomed
Inform 42:100–112

6. Gebicke-Haerter PJ (2008) Systems biology in
molecular psychiatry. Pharmacopsychiatry
41(suppl 1):S19–S27
7. Yan Q (2010) Translational bioinformatics and
systems biology approaches for personalized
medicine. Methods Mol Biol 662:167–178
8. Giegling I, Hartmann AM, Genius J, Benninghoff
J, Möller H-J, Rujescu D (2008) Systems biology and complex neurobehavioral traits.
Pharmacopsychiatry 41(suppl 1):S32–S36
9. Yan Q (2003) Bioinformatics and data integration in membrane transporter studies. Methods
Mol Biol 227:37–60
10. Huys QJM, Moutoussis M, Williams J (2011)
Are computational models of any use to psychiatry? Neural Netw 24:544–551
11. American Medical Informatics Association
(AMIA). Available from http://www.amia.
org/applications-informatics/translationalbioinformatics. Accessed Nov 2011

398

Q. Yan

12. Yan Q (2000) Preventing adverse drug events
(ADEs): the role of computer information systems. Drug Inf J 34:1247–1260
13. Radulovic D, Jelveh S et al (2004) Informatics
platform for global proteomic profiling and biomarker discovery using liquid chromatographytandem mass spectrometry. Mol Cell Proteomics
3:984–997
14. Bloss CS, Schiabor KM, Schork NJ (2010)
Human behavioral informatics in genetic studies
of neuropsychiatric disease: multivariate profilebased analysis. Brain Res Bull 83:177–188
15. Tretter F, Albus M (2008) Systems biology and
psychiatry—modeling molecular and cellular networks of mental disorders. Pharmacopsychiatry
41(suppl 1):S2–S18
16. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W et al (1990)
Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol
215(3):403–410
17. Larkin MA, Blackshields G, Brown NP et al
(2007) Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0.
Bioinformatics 23:2947–2948
18. Sigrist CJA, Cerutti L, de Castro E et al (2010)
PROSITE, a protein domain database for functional characterization and annotation. Nucleic
Acids Res 38(Database issue):D161–D166
19. The UniProt Consortium (2010) The Universal
Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic
Acids Res 38(Database issue):D142–D148
20. Rost B, Yachdav G, Liu J (2004) The
PredictProtein server. Nucleic Acids Res
32(Web Server issue):W321–W326
21. Rose PW, Beran B, Bi C et al (2011) The RCSB
Protein Data Bank: redesigned web site and
web services. Nucleic Acids Res 39(Database
issue):D392–D401
22. Frazer KA, Ballinger DG, Cox DR et al (2007)
A second generation human haplotype map of
over 3.1 million SNPs. Nature 449:851–861
23. Manolio TA, Brooks LD, Collins FS (2008)
A HapMap harvest of insights into the genetics of
common disease. J Clin Invest 118:1590–1605
24. Sherry ST, Ward MH, Kholodov M et al (2001)
dbSNP: the NCBI database of genetic variation. Nucleic Acids Res 29:308–311
25. Salomonis N, Hanspers K, Zambon AC et al
(2007) GenMAPP 2: new features and resources
for pathway analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 8:217
26. Kanehisa M, Goto S, Hattori M et al (2006)
From genomics to chemical genomics: new
developments in KEGG. Nucleic Acids Res
34(Database issue):D354–D357
27. Keshava Prasad TS, Goel R, Kandasamy K et al
(2009) Human protein reference database—2009 update. Nucleic Acids Res
37(Database issue):D767–D772

28. Croft D, O’Kelly G, Wu G et al (2011)
Reactome: a database of reactions, pathways
and biological processes. Nucleic Acids Res
39(Database issue):D691–D697
29. Stark C, Breitkreutz B-J, Chatr-Aryamontri A
et al (2011) The BioGRID interaction database: 2011 update. Nucleic Acids Res
39(Database issue):D698–D704
30. Hamosh A, Scott AF, Amberger JS et al (2005)
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM),
a knowledgebase of human genes and genetic
disorders. Nucleic Acids Res 33(Database
issue):D514–D517
31. Barrett T, Edgar R (2006) Gene expression
omnibus: microarray data storage, submission,
retrieval, and analysis. Methods Enzymol
411:352–369
32. Lombard Z, Park C, Makova KD et al (2011) A
computational approach to candidate gene prioritization for X-linked mental retardation using
annotation-based binary filtering and motifbased linear discriminatory analysis. Biol Direct
6:30
33. Gormanns P, Mueller NS, Ditzen C et al (2011)
Phenome-transcriptome correlation unravels
anxiety and depression related pathways. J
Psychiatr Res 45:973–979
34. Wolford G, Rosenberg SD, Rosenberg HJ et al
(2008) A clinical trial comparing interviewer and
computer-assisted assessment among clients with
severe mental illness. Psychiatr Serv 59:769–775
35. Yan Q (2010) Bioinformatics for transporter
pharmacogenomics and systems biology: data
integration and modeling with UML. Methods
Mol Biol 637:23–45
36. Daemen A, Gevaert O, Ojeda F et al (2009)
A kernel-based integration of genome-wide data
for clinical decision support. Genome Med 1:39
37. Croning MDR, Marshall MC, McLaren P et al
(2009) G2Cdb: the genes to cognition database. Nucleic Acids Res 37(Database
issue):D846–D851
38. Sabb FW, Bearden CE, Glahn DC et al (2008)
A collaborative knowledge base for cognitive
phenomics. Mol Psychiatry 13:350–360
39. Kim S, Webster MJ (2010) The stanley neuropathology consortium integrative database: a novel,
web-based tool for exploring neuropathological
markers in psychiatric disorders and the biological processes associated with abnormalities of
those markers. Neuropsychopharmacology
35:473–482
40. Hucka M, Finney A, Bornstein BJ et al (2004)
Evolving a lingua franca and associated software
infrastructure for computational systems biology: the Systems Biology Markup Language
(SBML) project. Syst Biol (Stevenage) 1:41–53

20

Translational Bioinformatics in Psychoneuroimmunology…

41. Rassinoux AM (2008) Decision support,
knowledge representation and management:
structuring knowledge for better access. Findings
from the yearbook 2008 section on decision
support, knowledge representation and management. Yearb Med Inform 2008:80–82
42. Peleg M, Tu S (2006) Decision support, knowledge representation and management in medicine. Yearb Med Inform 2006:72–80
43. Moskovitch R, Martins SB, Behiri E et al
(2007) A comparative evaluation of full-text,
concept-based, and context-sensitive search.
J Am Med Inform Assoc 14:164–174
44. Thomas PD, Mi H, Swan GE et al (2009) A systems biology network model for genetic association studies of nicotine addiction and treatment.
Pharmacogenet Genomics 19:538–551
45. Roque FS, Jensen PB, Schmock H et al (2011)
Using electronic patient records to discover
disease correlations and stratify patient cohorts.
PLoS Comput Biol 7:e1002141
46. Cohen T, Blatter B, Patel V (2008) Simulating
expert clinical comprehension: adapting latent
semantic analysis to accurately extract clinical
concepts from psychiatric narrative. J Biomed
Inform 41:1070–1087
47. Vodovotz Y, An G (2010) Systems biology and
inflammation. Methods Mol Biol 662:181–201
48. Yan Q (2010) Immunoinformatics and systems
biology methods for personalized medicine.
Methods Mol Biol 662:203–220
49. Cohen AM, Hersh WR (2005) A survey of current work in biomedical text mining. Brief
Bioinform 6:57–71
50. Nelson TD, Aylward BS, Rausch JR (2011)
Dynamic p-technique for modeling patterns of
data: applications to pediatric psychology
research. J Pediatr Psychol 36:959–968
51. Rudan I (2010) New technologies provide
insights into genetic basis of psychiatric disorders and explain their co-morbidity. Psychiatr
Danub 22:190–192
52. Tretter F, Gebicke-Haerter PJ, an der Heiden U
et al (2011) Affective disorders as complex
dynamic diseases—a perspective from systems
biology. Pharmacopsychiatry 44(suppl 1):S2–S8
53. Tretter F (2010) Mental illness, synapses and
the brain–behavioral disorders by a system of
molecules within a system of neurons?
Pharmacopsychiatry 43(suppl 1):S9–S20
54. Xiao X, Dawson N, Macintyre L et al (2011)
Exploring metabolic pathway disruption in the
subchronic phencyclidine model of schizophrenia
with the Generalized Singular Value Decomposition.
BMC Syst Biol 5:72
55. Liu Z-P, Wang Y, Zhang X-S et al (2010)
Identifying dysfunctional crosstalk of pathways

399

in various regions of Alzheimer’s disease brains.
BMC Syst Biol 4(suppl 2):S11
56. Schreiber G, Akkermans H, Anjewierden A
et al (2000) Knowledge engineering and management: the common KADS methodology.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
57. Spaulding W, Deogun J (2011) A pathway to personalization of integrated treatment: informatics
and decision science in psychiatric rehabilitation.
Schizophr Bull 37(suppl 2):S129–S137
58. Haueis P, Greil W, Huber M et al (2011)
Evaluation of drug interactions in a large sample of psychiatric inpatients: a data interface for
mass analysis with clinical decision support
software. Clin Pharmacol Ther 90:588–596
59. Mane KK, Bizon C, Schmitt C et al (2012)
VisualDecisionLinc: a visual analytics approach
for comparative effectiveness-based clinical
decision support in psychiatry. J Biomed Inform
45(1):101–106
60. Woltmann EM, Wilkniss SM, Teachout A et al
(2011) Trial of an electronic decision support system to facilitate shared decision making in community mental health. Psychiatr Serv 62:54–60
61. Brunette MF, Ferron JC, McHugo GJ et al
(2011) An electronic decision support system
to motivate people with severe mental illnesses
to quit smoking. Psychiatr Serv 62:360–366
62. Goldstein LA, Connolly Gibbons MB,
Thompson SM et al (2011) Outcome assessment via handheld computer in community
mental health: consumer satisfaction and reliability. J Behav Health Serv Res 38:414–423
63. Freeman JB, Ambady N (2010) MouseTracker:
software for studying real-time mental processing using a computer mouse-tracking method.
Behav Res Methods 42:226–241
64. Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ (2010) Computerassisted therapy in psychiatry: be brave-it’s a
new world. Curr Psychiatry Rep 12:426–432
65. Marks I, Cavanagh K (2009) Computer-aided
psychological treatments: evolving issues. Annu
Rev Clin Psychol 5:121–141
66. Stuhlmiller C, Tolchard B (2009) Computerassisted CBT for depression & anxiety: increasing accessibility to evidence-based mental
health treatment. J Psychosoc Nurs Ment
Health Serv 47:32–39
67. Kiluk BD, Sugarman DE, Nich C et al (2011) A
methodological analysis of randomized clinical
trials of computer-assisted therapies for psychiatric disorders: toward improved standards for an
emerging field. Am J Psychiatry 168:790–799
68. The eMERGE Network. Available from
https://www.mc.vanderbilt.edu/victr/dcc/
projects/acc/index.php/Main_Page. Accessed
Oct 2011

400

Q. Yan

69. National Human Genome Research Institute.
Available
from
http://www.genome.
gov/24519851. Accessed Oct 2011
70. The Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA). Available from
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/. Accessed
Oct 2011

71. Hesse BW, Suls JM (2011) Informatics-enabled
behavioral medicine in oncology. Cancer J
17:222–230
72. Marcus DS, Harwell J, Olsen T et al (2011)
Informatics and data mining tools and strategies for the human connectome project. Front
Neuroinform 5:4

INDEX

A
Adaptation........... 9, 12, 33, 40, 66, 78, 97, 99, 261, 262, 344
Adhesion molecules .................. 110, 174, 175, 283, 284, 289
Aged........ 33, 40, 98, 167, 174, 176, 193, 196–200, 202–208,
210–212, 246, 285, 287, 304, 321, 327, 332, 359
Aging....... ......14, 16, 33, 34, 59, 96, 108, 109, 111, 113, 122,
124, 132–134, 141, 167, 193–212, 246, 270, 280,
360, 361
Alzheimer’s disease .......................................................... 117
Anhedonia ........................................ 127, 261, 262, 335, 336
Animal model ... 126, 170, 174, 221–223, 232, 245, 279, 280,
303, 308
ANN. See Artificial neural networks (ANN)
Anorexia ...................................................108, 109, 250, 253
Antibodies, antibody response ........... 31, 356–368, 371–376,
378–380
Antigens ...................................................................... 43, 44
Anxiety ......................................4, 7, 9–12, 15, 30, 61, 66, 68
Arrays 129, 132–134, 136, 137, 141
Arthritis .......................................... 44, 10, 11, 13, 14, 77, 84
Artificial neural networks (ANN) .................................. 393
Autism, autism spectrum disorders (ASD), 219–232
Autoimmunity, autoimmunity-associated behavioral
syndrome ............................................................. 283

B
Batch PLS ....................................................................... 152
BBB. See Blood–brain barrier (BBB)
Behavior ......................... 4, 7, 23, 24, 30, 42, 92, 95, 96, 107,
108, 111, 112, 115, 117, 125, 161, 186, 200–202,
219–232, 243–248, 250–261, 263, 264, 267, 268,
270, 278–281, 285–287, 290, 291, 302–304, 335,
361, 384, 386
Behavioral dysfunction .............................280, 285, 288, 289
Biobehaviors .................................................................... 272
Bioinformatics, translational bioinformatics ............ 383–397
Biomarker ............................ 7, 105–118, 121–141, 145–162,
384, 386, 389, 390, 392, 393, 397
Biopsychosocial model..........................................6–9, 11, 16
Bipolar disorder ..................................................15, 224, 386
Blood–brain barrier (BBB) ............... 116, 123, 204, 277, 326

Brain
brain-based .................................................244, 245, 250
brain pathology ............123, 128, 279, 281, 285, 286, 290
Burnout ................... 40, 42, 45, 46, 48, 49, 54–57, 61, 66, 67

C
CAD. See Coronary artery disease (CAD)
Caloric restriction ............................................................ 209
Cancer, anticancer ............................ 184, 185, 187–189, 191
Cardiovascular disease ....... 4, 7, 10, 11, 14, 33, 42, 61, 66, 89
Caregiving ............................................................... 358, 360
CBT. See Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
CDSS. See Computerized decision support systems (CDSS)
Chemokine .............................. 110, 114, 116, 123, 175–177,
195, 199, 207, 222, 230, 277, 372
Chemotaxis.............................................................. 175–178
Chromium release bioassay...................................... 313–323
Clinical outcomes ............................... 11, 172, 180, 385, 390
Cognition ............ 30, 108, 113, 193–212, 244, 262, 303, 335
Cognitive
behaviors ............................................................ 262–269
complaints ................................................................. 147
deficits ....................................... 194, 200–205, 207, 209,
210, 227, 250
function ......................................... 5, 124, 201, 203, 204,
206–208, 210, 229, 262, 386, 391
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) .............................. 396
Cohort......... .......................62, 89, 90, 92, 93, 147, 150–162,
220, 359, 361, 375–377
Computational tools ................................................ 148–149
Computerized decision support systems (CDSS), 392, 395
Computers ................................ 254, 260, 385, 387, 390, 396
Consciousness.....................................................25, 185, 186
Coping.......................................7, 9, 11, 14, 26, 64, 172, 260
Coronary artery disease (CAD) ................................. 12, 167
Corticotrophin......................................................... 4, 83–84
Cytokine
cytokine profile ...........................................139, 161, 228
pro-inflammatory cytokines .................. 80, 95, 126, 127,
136, 139, 206, 224, 283, 286–288
Cytotoxicity ................................12, 110, 184, 226, 281, 287,
313, 315, 320–322, 356

Qing Yan (ed.), Psychoneuroimmunology: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 934,
DOI 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7, © Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012

401

SYCHONEUROIMMUNOLOGY
402 P
Index

D
Data integration .......................................384, 385, 390–397
Data mining .............................................385, 390, 393–396
Databases..................................................388, 391, 392, 395
Decision support ......................................384, 385, 390–397
Dementia ....................................... 5, 10, 113, 122, 139, 203,
204, 289, 358, 360, 367
Depression .............................................. 4, 5, 7, 9–12, 14–16
Depressive symptoms ............................ 15, 89–96, 110, 112,
127, 170, 171, 173–179, 259, 335, 339
Development 3–6, 12–14, 16, 26, 29–33, 64, 81, 82, 93, 114,
115, 122, 123, 128, 137–141, 166, 187, 191, 193, 200,
203–205, 207–209, 220, 221, 223–225, 227, 232,
260, 261, 280–291, 303, 305–308, 315, 367, 378,
385, 386, 389, 397
Diabetes............................ 4, 9, 10, 14, 30, 33, 34, 42, 66, 89,
114, 167, 210, 220, 246, 111
Diagnosis ...................... 6, 7, 16, 91, 106, 107, 109, 114, 117,
118, 122, 124, 125, 128, 138, 140, 146, 166, 171, 176,
179, 203, 280, 385, 387
Diagnostic classification .......................................... 149, 153
Diet................................7, 12, 15, 30, 69, 194, 209–211, 230
Drug discovery ........................................................ 124, 128

E
Economic recession .............................. 41, 42, 45, 54, 62–68
Electronic health records (EHRs) ............385, 392, 393, 397
ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Emotional.................................12–14, 26, 45, 46, 48, 55, 57,
60, 66, 67, 106, 110, 115, 124, 172, 264, 281, 286,
289, 291, 358, 363, 367, 386
Emotions .................................4, 9, 10, 27, 59, 185, 335, 367
Endocrine system ....................................... 4, 22, 25, 40, 106
Endotoxin ........... 15, 200, 206, 208, 211, 335, 336, 339, 340,
343–350
Environment ..................................4, 7, 9, 22–24, 28, 32, 33,
35, 39, 41, 42, 66, 94, 106, 195, 198, 202, 206, 211,
225, 230, 245–247, 249, 250, 252, 258, 270, 277, 279,
283, 302, 372, 386, 396
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)............. 123,
128, 129, 131–133, 135–137, 147, 148, 173, 174, 378
Epidemiology ........................... 166–167, 170–172, 220, 394
Evolution ......... 29–32, 34, 126, 156, 157, 245, 387, 390, 396
Exercise
aerobic exercise ...................................194, 209–211, 314
exercise response .................................147–149, 157–160
exercise withdrawal ................................................ 96–99
Experience ................................10, 23–28, 32, 34, 47, 50, 51,
53, 55, 58, 59, 61, 170, 173, 180, 186, 207, 250, 280,
305, 351, 360

F
Fatigue.. ....................................46, 66, 67, 93, 106, 108, 109,
111, 112, 117, 139, 145, 147, 157, 167, 173, 179, 244,
250, 254, 269–271, 315, 317, 322, 336, 339

FDG. See Fluorine-18-labeled2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG)
Fear............... ...............11, 200, 201, 205, 259, 264–269, 303
Flow cytometry................................. 130, 132, 316, 320, 379
Fluorine-18-labeled 2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG), 337,
340–343, 350, 351
Food consumption ................................................... 253–254

G
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) .....386, 387, 394
Genotypes .............................................................5, 34, 107,
111, 391, 397
Glucocorticoid receptor ........................................... 4, 79–81
Gulf War Illness (GWI) .................................. 145–162, 314
GWAS. See Genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
GWI. See Gulf War Illness (GWI)

H
Heart failure .................................................... 115, 165–180
Hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay....................... 378
High throughput (HTP) .................................107, 131, 133,
134, 137, 141, 252, 270, 271, 386, 387, 390
Hippocampus .................................. 5, 12, 95, 197, 200–203,
205–207, 210, 211, 285, 288, 302–308
HIV. See Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Homeostasis .................................... 8, 13, 82, 108, 114, 178,
195, 200, 225, 227, 277–279, 306, 308
Hormone ..................................4, 5, 9, 13, 31, 40, 47, 50, 51,
53, 55, 58, 78, 83, 94, 96, 114, 116, 146, 149, 161,
184, 187, 188, 279, 285, 287, 288, 291, 365, 367, 390
HPA axis. See Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis
HTP. See High throughput (HTP)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) ..................... 11, 15,
43, 61, 116, 136, 137, 313
Hypertension .............................99, 33, 39, 60, 167, 170, 203
Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis ............. 44, 88,
99, 13, 31, 78, 82, 83, 96, 99, 108, 111, 116, 117, 161,
173, 248, 278, 288, 335, 336

I
IBMT. See Integrative body-mind training (IBMT)
Immune
cells ...............................4, 30, 77–84, 123, 126, 169, 184,
187, 222, 225, 226, 232, 244, 279, 290, 302, 335, 336,
355, 356, 371, 372
function ..............................11, 15, 35, 40, 43, 60, 64, 69,
77–84, 116, 149, 150, 155, 210, 220, 225, 227, 231,
232, 246, 356, 357, 366, 371–380
system .............................4, 5, 7, 9, 11–13, 22, 25, 30–32,
34, 35, 39, 40, 43, 44, 59, 61, 63–66,77–80, 83, 84,
94, 96, 97, 106–108, 115, 123, 128, 146, 173, 177,
183, 185–189, 191, 193, 196, 200, 203, 205, 206, 211,
221, 222, 224–225, 227, 232, 244, 249, 255, 263,
277–279, 288, 292, 301, 302, 305–308, 335, 336,
356, 357, 361, 367, 371, 373–375, 379, 380, 393
innate immune system .......... 34, 115, 225, 227, 244, 249

PSYCHONEUROIMMUNOLOGY
403
Index
Immunity, innate immunity ..................................... 112, 231
Immunodeficient ............................................................. 308
Immunoinformatics ..................................385, 387, 388, 393
Immunology .......................... 33, 14–16, 105–108, 110–116,
172–179, 183, 334–336, 379, 383–385
Immunopsychiatry ........................................................... 277
In vivo............ .................................. 122, 187, 206, 226, 285,
304, 305, 325, 343, 344, 371–380
Infectious diseases ....................................................... 13, 33
Inflammation ................................6, 8–16, 34, 40, 43, 44, 66,
80, 94–96, 106, 109–117, 122, 126, 128, 161, 165,
169–170, 172, 173, 175, 177, 178, 193, 194, 196, 198,
200, 203–211, 269, 279, 283–290, 335, 336, 339,
343, 349, 350, 393
Inflammatory..............................8–16, 29, 30, 32, 34, 44, 56,
59, 60, 64, 65, 67, 77, 79–84, 94–99, 105–118,
122–124, 126–128, 158, 160, 168–170, 173–179,
185, 188, 189, 193–196, 198–200, 203, 204,
206–212, 224, 229, 230, 244, 279, 283
Influenza..................................... 33, 335, 357–367, 373–379
Integrative body-mind training (IBMT) ........................... 16
Interventions ................................. 4–7, 12–16, 63, 106, 111,
112, 114, 116, 117, 172, 205, 209–212, 366–368,
372, 373, 380, 385, 387, 395

K
K562 target cells ............................... 225, 226, 318, 319, 323
Knowledge discovery ........................ 384, 385, 390, 393–394

L
Learning .................................. 113, 200–206, 208, 210, 223,
227, 244, 250, 255, 257, 261, 262, 264–265,
267–269, 283, 285, 291, 302–304, 391, 393
Leukocytes ...............................................123, 174, 175, 335
Light cycle ............................................................... 247, 256
Locomotor activity .......................... 200, 202, 250, 252–253,
258, 265, 285
Long-term potentiation (LTP)........................205, 207–208,
302, 304, 390
Luminex ................................... 130–132, 136, 137, 378–379
Lupus, systemic lupus erythematosus .............. 222, 279–280
Lymphocytes ............................................. 43, 63, 66, 78, 83,
126, 184, 185, 187, 191, 196, 281, 286, 289, 291, 301,
305, 306, 320, 321, 355, 357, 374
Lymphokine .................................................................... 184

M
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) .............. 81, 195,
196, 209, 210, 231, 283, 289
Maze................................................ 200–202, 208, 209, 246,
256, 257, 259, 262, 265–269, 283, 304
MBCT. See Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT)
Meditation......................................................13, 15, 16, 373
Medline ............................................................................. 40
Melatonin ........................................................................ 187

Memory ............................................. 4, 43, 51, 77, 109, 186,
200–205, 207, 209, 210, 225, 227, 244, 250, 254,
262–269, 285, 302–304, 357, 387
Metabolomics .................................................................. 384
Methods .........................................12, 14, 16, 31, 40, 91, 94,
98, 106, 107, 112, 123, 128, 129, 132, 134, 139,
148–150, 153, 160, 209, 220, 243–272, 287,
318–322, 332, 337–343, 349, 355, 366, 372–374,
378, 379, 383–397
MHC. See Major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
Mice
congenicmice ..................................................... 307, 308
immunodeficient mice ............................................... 308
knockout mice .................... 199, 208, 211, 304–306, 308
Microbiome ....................................................................... 30
Microglia .... 11, 117, 122, 123, 126, 193–212, 225, 226, 283,
284, 289, 291, 302, 303, 343–346
Mind-body .............................................................. 5, 14–16
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) ................ 15
Mood................. .....................4, 14, 15, 64, 89–99, 106, 109,
112, 115, 117, 147, 165, 186, 194, 289, 335, 366
Morbidity ............................................... 63, 65, 66, 179, 375
Motor activity ............................................................ 30, 222
Mouse.......................................... 8, 130, 133, 194, 196, 211,
243–272, 280–282, 290, 301–308
Multiple sclerosis .................11, 113, 114, 196, 306, 308, 360
Multiplex assays............................................... 128–137, 141

N
Natural killer (NK) cell.......................... 7, 12, 13, 40, 43, 44,
48, 50, 59–65, 67–69, 79, 82, 184, 221, 225, 226, 230,
313–323, 355
cytotoxicity .........................................110, 313, 315, 322
Nervous system
central nervous system ........................... 9, 25, 40, 44, 78,
108, 193, 270
sympathetic nervous system............ 40, 78, 116, 168, 169
Neural plasticity....................................................... 193–212
Neurobehavioral dysfunction ........................................... 282
Neurobiology ................................................................... 384
Neurodegeneration ............................ 11, 111, 123, 128, 138,
139, 194, 196, 198, 209, 212, 284, 287, 289, 291, 306
Neurodegenerative diseases ...... 113, 114, 194, 198, 209, 308
Neurodevelopment ................... 219–223, 231, 232, 307, 308
Neuroendocrine .... 44, 88, 10, 11, 13, 61, 77–84, 96, 99, 107,
109, 116, 145, 146, 149, 150, 156, 162, 184, 187–189,
227, 278, 279, 313, 371, 372
Neurogenesis ....... 95, 111, 113, 127, 205–207, 225, 285, 305
Neuroimmune .... 79, 165–180, 184, 186, 190, 198, 199, 224,
244–248, 254, 255, 261–266, 268, 270
Neuroimmunology .................................................. 302, 308
Neuroimmunomodulation ................................................. 79
Neuroimmunotherapy ............................................. 189–191
Neuroinflammation ......................... 116, 122, 193, 194, 200,
205, 209–211, 283, 284, 290, 343
Neuroinformatics..............................................385, 387, 388

SYCHONEUROIMMUNOLOGY
404 P
Index

Neurological
diseases .............................................................. 106, 122
disorders .....................................................122, 128, 304
Neuromedicine ................................................................ 301
Neurons ..................................99, 11, 79, 109, 113, 114, 138,
140, 186, 198–200, 205–207, 211, 212, 224, 229,
284–287, 289, 291, 292, 302–306, 308, 338, 343, 386
Neuropeptides ...................................... 99, 12, 108, 146, 302
Neuroplasticity ................................................ 205–208, 343
Neuroprotective ........................ 138, 139, 206, 209–212, 343
Neuroscience .......................33, 186, 337, 385, 388, 391, 397
Neurotransmission..............................................95, 186, 343
Neurotransmitter ........................... 55, 99–11, 78, 79, 81–82,
95, 108, 109, 111, 117, 127, 146, 149, 186, 244, 290,
291, 304, 325, 334, 343
Neurotrophic factors ............................ 11, 95, 112, 125, 138,
229, 304–305
Nitric oxide (NO), 186, 195, 210, 287, 289
Nutrition ......................................................................... 209

O
Obesity .............. 10, 12, 30, 39, 106, 109, 114–115, 203, 244
Oncology ......................................................................... 337
Osteoporosis .................................................................. 4, 10
Outcome............................. 4, 6, 7, 11, 22, 23, 39, 40, 59–62,
64, 78, 81, 83, 90, 94, 105, 147, 149, 171–172, 180,
222, 245, 304, 358, 360, 366, 367, 373, 374, 377–379,
384–386, 390, 395, 396

P
Parkinson’s disease ............................ 117, 121–141, 209, 210
Partial least squares ...................................148, 149, 153, 159
Pathogenesis .........................10, 22, 107, 113, 116, 122, 124,
139, 141, 145, 165, 183–191, 220, 231, 280, 285, 286,
304, 306, 336
Pathophysiology .............................. 110, 166, 168–170, 172,
176, 303, 391
Pathway ..............................9, 32, 83–84, 109, 111–116, 127,
161, 179, 199, 232, 336, 379, 388, 390
signaling ......... 77, 99, 10, 81, 94, 95, 107, 108, 111, 112,
114–117, 211, 222, 248, 387, 389, 391
Patterns........................... 55–88, 15, 16, 24, 32, 33, 113, 122,
136, 137, 146, 148, 152–158, 160, 161, 223, 224, 228,
244, 247, 248, 258, 268, 269, 283, 365, 386, 387, 389,
390, 393
co-expression ......................................147, 154–156, 161
Perception ......................8, 23–26, 30, 60, 171, 172, 186, 187
Personality ........................................................7, 8, 366, 386
Personalized medicine ......................... 33, 55–99, 11, 14, 16,
105–106, 111, 118, 124, 385–390, 393, 397
PET. See Positron emission tomography imaging
Phenotype ..................................5, 32, 79–83, 107, 139, 146,
194–200, 206, 207, 211, 212, 222, 224, 245, 246, 282,
343, 386, 389, 391, 393, 397

Physical activity ............................. 77, 89–99, 167, 176, 210,
211, 243–272
Pineal gland ..................................................................... 189
Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging .......122, 140,
325–351
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)........................ 10, 12
Primates......................................................25, 126, 334, 336
Prognosis ..... 16, 122, 165, 166, 170–172, 179, 180, 188, 387
Proteomics ........................................ 128, 141, 231, 384, 391
Psoriasis ............................................................10, 11, 13, 14
Psychiatric ..................................... 88, 10, 13, 109, 124, 128,
139, 140, 279, 292, 339, 385, 386, 393, 395, 396
disorders ...............................12, 106, 107, 109, 111, 224,
303, 304, 336, 396
Psychiatry ................................................................ 384, 385
Psychological ................................4, 7–14, 16, 22, 25, 30, 31,
33, 40, 42, 43, 52, 59, 61, 63, 65, 91, 93, 106, 112,
116, 125, 127, 165, 171, 177, 187, 231, 250,
278, 315, 355, 358, 359, 361–367, 372, 373,
377, 379, 384, 396
Psychology ....................................................33, 61, 384, 393
Psychometric tools ..................................................... 91, 147
Psychoneuroimmunology ..........................33–16, 21–35, 40,
78, 105–118, 172–179, 243–272, 302, 307, 308,
313–323, 325–351, 355–368, 371–380, 383–397
Psychophysiology............................................................... 89
Psychosocial factors ............................. 22, 90, 116, 356–358,
364–366, 371, 374–377, 379
Psychotic disorders ............................................................ 99
PTSD. See Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
PubMed............................................................................. 40

R
Radionuclides ................................... 326–328, 331, 337, 350
Radiotracers ..............325–328, 330–334, 338, 339, 343, 344,
346–348, 350
Receptors
Regression model .............................................130, 155, 175
Regulatory metasystem ............................................ 277–279
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system .................... 168–169
Rodents ......................................80, 124, 126, 127, 196, 227,
244, 245, 250, 256, 260, 302, 304, 335, 336, 343, 346
Rotarod............................................................ 250, 254–255

S
Saliva.......... ..........................16, 40, 41, 44, 60, 69, 123, 147,
148, 151–154, 160, 355, 357
Schizophrenia .................................. 109, 122, 221, 224, 231,
306–308, 384, 386, 387, 394
Septohippocampal system ....................................... 303–304
septohippocampal cytoarchitecture .................... 304–305
Sickness behaviors ....................................200–202, 250–255
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) ............... 387, 388
Skin diseases ...................................................................... 13

PSYCHONEUROIMMUNOLOGY
405
Index
Sleep........... .......................... 4, 11, 13, 14, 39, 47, 50, 51, 53,
55, 58, 60, 64, 66, 69, 106, 108, 109, 112, 113, 124,
125, 139, 179, 244, 253, 335
SNPs. See Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
Social support ......... 44, 40, 42, 42, 48, 49, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57,
59–61, 64, 358, 360, 364–367, 372, 377
Statistics ................................... 148, 149, 159, 322, 332, 393
Stress
chronic .....4, 5, 8–12, 59, 84, 90, 109, 131, 278, 282, 284,
288, 355, 356, 358, 360, 361, 364, 371, 375
mental ................................................... 60, 94, 96, 98, 99
psychological.................................. 10–14, 22, 30, 31, 40,
42, 65, 127, 315, 358, 359, 363–366, 377
psychosocial job ..................................................... 39–69
Stressors..................................8, 9, 11–13, 22, 40–42, 45, 48,
51, 52, 54, 56, 59, 60, 68, 69, 90, 98, 111, 117, 127,
272, 277–279, 282, 313
Stroke............. ............................ 42, 114–116, 122, 169, 344
Systems biology ............................... 3–6, 8–10, 16, 106–107,
114, 384–386, 388, 392–394

T
T cell...........................................5, 35, 40, 79, 114, 123, 178,
185, 227, 283, 306, 315, 356, 372

Thymus ...............................81, 281, 357, 363, 364, 374, 375
Transcriptomics ............................................................... 384
Translational medicine .................................11–14, 109, 385
Tumor......... .................... 43, 44, 53, 55, 58, 77, 94, 110, 169,
184, 185, 187, 188, 190, 195, 225, 248, 250, 313, 335

U
UML. See Unified Modeling Language (UML)
Umwelt .............................................................24–28, 31, 32
Unemployment .......................................... 40–42, 45, 46, 48,
55, 58, 62–66
Unified Modeling Language (UML) ...............388, 390, 395
Urine................................................................40, 41, 68, 69,
248, 255, 340

V
Vaccination ................................. 94, 350, 354–368, 371–380
Vaccine .............................................. 5, 28, 31, 33, 356–359,
361–365, 372–380, 386, 397

W
Wellbeing .................................................. 42, 61, 64, 90, 95,
99, 244, 245, 249–251

