Review

Repairing the parkinsonian brain with
neurotrophic factors
Liviu Aron* and Rüdiger Klein
Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max-Planck Institute of Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

No therapy exists to slow down or prevent Parkinson’s
disease (PD), a debilitating neurodegenerative disorder.
Neurotrophic factors (NTFs) emerged as promising disease-modifying agents in PD and are currently under
clinical development. We argue that efforts in three
research areas must converge to harness the full therapeutic power of NTFs. First, the physiological roles
of NTFs in aging dopaminergic neurons must be comprehensively understood. Second, the mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective, neurorestorative and
stimulatory effects of NTFs on diseased neurons need
to be defined. Third, improved brain delivery of NTFs and
new ways to stimulate NTF signaling are required to
achieve clinical benefits. In this review, we discuss progress in these areas and highlight emerging concepts in
NTF biology and therapy.
Introduction
More than five million people are afflicted with Parkinson’s
disease (PD) worldwide. The incidence of PD increases
with age and the number of cases is expected to increase
steadily, paralleling the aging of human society. The degeneration of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the subsequent depletion of
dopamine in the striatum is the major pathological event
in PD. A second pathological correlate of PD is the presence
of cytoplasmic aggregates (called Lewy Bodies) containing
alpha-synuclein (a-syn) in the remaining SN neurons [1].
Neuropathology in PD is widespread, extending well beyond the nigro-striatal system (NSS), and progressively
affecting other neuronal populations [2]. Current understanding of PD is incomplete and, although studies of genes
associated with familial PD (see Glossary) have identified
several pathogenic processes that might cause disease [1],
there is a lack of an animal model that recapitulates all
disease features. The inability of currently available symptomatic therapies (based on dopamine replacement) to
prevent, delay, or stop the disease is perhaps the most
frustrating aspect of PD.
Neurotrophic factors (NTFs) are secreted proteins that
regulate the development, maintenance, function and plasticity of the vertebrate nervous system. Four major classes
of molecules comprise the NTF family: (i) the neurotrophin
family; (ii) the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF) family of ligands (GFLs); (iii) the neurotrophic
Corresponding authors: Aron, L. (liviu@hms.harvard.edu); Klein, R.
(rklein@neuro.mpg.de)
*
Present address: Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue
Louis Pasteur, 02115 Boston, MA, USA.

88

cytokines (neurokines); and (iv) the new family of cerebral
dopamine neurotrophic factor (CDNF) and mesencephalic
astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) (Table 1).
NTFs are the most potent mediators of neuronal survival

Glossary
Adeno-associated virus (AAV): a small virus that infects dividing and nondividing cells. AAV transduces neurons with high efficiency, but it does not
induce strong immunological responses. AAV might integrate into the
genome, but only at specific sites. The AAV2 serotype is the best studied
and the only one utilized in clinical trials so far.
Double-blind, placebo-controlled trial: a type of clinical trial in which neither
the researchers nor the participants know whether a placebo (inert tablet or
sham surgery) or the active compound is being administered.
Double-blind, placebo-controlled, delayed-start trial (DBDST): a trial specifically designed to detect potential disease-modifying effects (as opposed to
symptomatic improvement). A first phase, in which participants receive either
the active compound or placebo, is followed by a second phase, in which all
participants receive the active compound. Persistent differences between
treatments with active compound versus placebo after the second phase
cannot be explained by symptomatic relief only, and suggest the existence of
disease-modifying effects.
Familial PD: (as opposed to sporadic PD) represents a subset (5–10%) of PD
patients with a family history of PD. Mutations in five genes have been
consistently associated with familial PD cases. Mutations in genes encoding asyn and leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2, also called dardarin) cause
autosomal dominant PD, whereas mutations in those encoding parkin, DJ-1
and PINK1 cause autosomal recessive PD. Other genes [including those
encoding ATPase type 13A2 (ATP13A2) and the HTRA serine peptidase 2
(HTRA2, also called OMI)] have been associated with PD or might act as risk
factors for PD, but the evidence is currently weak.
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA): a dopaminergic- and noradrenergic-specific
toxin that cannot pass the BBB and must be injected locally. Re-uptake
transporters enable 6-OHDA to enter dopaminergic neurons, where it
generates free radicals and leads to cell death.
Lentivirus (LV): a retrovirus that infects both dividing and non-dividing cells.
LVs are effective in infecting neurons and do not induce immune responses.
However, they do integrate into the host genome at unpredictable sites and
thus might be a cause of concern because of their oncogenic potential. LVs
have been extensively utilized for ex vivo gene transfer.
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP): a dopaminergic-specific
neurotoxin that can pass the BBB. MPTP is metabolized by glial cells to release
MPP+, which is transported inside dopaminergic neurons and blocks
mitochondrial complex I, leading to cell death.
Neuroprotective agents: compounds that are able to prevent or slow down
neurodegeneration. This is tested experimentally by applying the agent before
the injury and determining whether this decreases the extent of neurodegeneration.
Neurorestorative agents: compounds that are able to repair already damaged
neurons (e.g. by promoting axonal repair) and might also promote their survival.
This effect is tested experimentally by applying the agent after the injury and
determining whether this can improve neuron function and/or survival.
Open label trial (open trial; OL): a type of clinical trial in which both the
researchers and the participants know which treatment is being administered.
An OL might still be randomized (i.e. the treatments or conditions are randomly
allocated).
Rotenone: a widely used insecticide that, at higher doses, induces parkinsonism in laboratory animals. Rotenone can pass the BBB and accumulates in
many types of neurons, where it inhibits mitochondrial complex I activity.
Dopaminergic neurons are particularly vulnerable to its toxic effects.
Stimulatory agents: promote neuronal metabolism and activity, including the
release of neurotransmitter.

0166-2236/$ – see front matter ß 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2010.11.001 Trends in Neurosciences, February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

Review

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

Table 1. Neurotrophic factors and their effects on dopaminergic neuronsa
Family
GFLs

NTF
GDNF
NRTN

New NTFs
Neurotrophins

Neurokines

Other factors c

PSPN
ARTN
CDNF
MANF
NGF
BDNF
NT-3
NT-4
CNTF
LIF
IL-6
CT-1
OSM
TGF-b
bFGF

Receptor(s)
Ret/GFRa1 and
NCAM/GFRa1
Ret/GFRa2 and
NCAM/GFRa2
Ret/GFRa3
Ret/GFRa4
Unknown
Unknown
TrkA and p75NTR
TrkB and p75NTR
TrkC and p75NTR
TrkB and p75NTR
gp130, LIFRb
and CNTFRa
gp130 and LIFRb
gp130 and IL6Ra
gp130 and LIFRb
gp130 and OSMRb
TGFBR1-3
FGFR1-4

Effects on dopaminergic neurons
Studied in vitro/in vivo
Protective
Yes/Yes
Yes

Restorative
Yes

Stimulatory
Yes

Yes/Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes/Yes d
Yes/Yes d
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
ND
Yes
Yes

ND
ND
Yes
Yes
ND
ND
Yes
ND
ND

Yes
Yes
ND
ND
Yes
Yes
ND
Yes
ND

Yes/ND
Yes/ND
Yes/ND
ND/ND
Yes/Yes
Yes/Yes

ND
ND
ND
ND
Yes
Yes

ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND
Yes
Yes

Refs (for reviews)
[4,6,26,27,91] b

[23] b
[26,27,91]

[27]

[91–93]

a
Abbreviations: NT-3, neurotrophin-3; NT-4, neurotrophin-4; CNTF, ciliary neurotrophic factor; LIF, leukemia-inhibitory factor; IL-6, interleukin-6; CT-1, cardiotrophin-1; OSM,
oncostatin-M; bFGF, basic fibroblast growth factor; ND, not determined.
b
Also see main text.
c
Several other factors [including insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1); epidermal growth factor (EGF); vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF); vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP); erythropoietin (EPO); sonic hedgehog (SHH) and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)] were reported to exert effects on dopaminergic neurons (reviewed in
[23,27,91,93]).
d
The in vivo effects of PSPN and ARTN require higher concentrations of ligand than do those of GDNF and NRTN.

identified to date and, not surprisingly, have emerged as
promising therapeutic agents for neurodegenerative disorders, including PD. Fuelled by encouraging results in
cellular and animal models of PD (Table 1), several clinical
trials (discussed below) have involved the administration
of GDNF to PD patients. The conflicting results obtained
are perhaps not surprising, given the current rudimentary
understanding of the roles of NTF in aging and diseased
DA neurons. A successful NTF therapy for PD will require
an in-depth molecular and integrative understanding of
the impact of NTFs on physiological and pathophysiological processes at play in dopaminergic neurons, coupled
with effective and safe strategies for activating NTF signaling in the human brain. Here, we present new developments in these basic, pre-clinical and clinical areas of
NTF research, and highlight emerging trends in NTF
biology and therapy.
Physiological roles of NTFs in dopaminergic neurons
Whereas the pharmacological properties of many NTFs
have been tested on diseased DA neurons (Table 1), comparatively little is known about their physiological roles in
intact and aging neurons. We discuss here the physiology
of GDNF and the new CDNF/MANF factors, the most
potent pharmacological agents in experimental studies
of PD.
GDNF
Identified in 1993 as a survival-promoting agent for cultured dopaminergic neurons [3], GDNF also maintains
motor, sympathetic, parasympathetic, sensory and enteric
neurons; outside the nervous system, it regulates kidney
development and spermatogenesis [4,5]. GDNF is the prototypical member of the GFLs, which also comprise neur-

turin (NRTN), artemin (ARTN) and persephin (PSPN); the
latter two factors lack co-receptors in the central nervous
system (CNS) and act only in the periphery. Signal transduction by GFLs is unique among NTFs and involves the
initial interaction between a dimeric GFL and two molecules of GDNF family receptor a (GFRa1–4) co-receptor
(Figure 1). The ensuing GFL–GFRa complex recruits the
Ret receptor tyrosine kinase, the common signaling receptor for all four GFLs. Formation of the tripartite GFL–
GFRa–Ret complex promotes Ret dimerization and reciprocal trans-autophosphorylation within the Ret intracellular tyrosine kinase domain [4]. The GFRa1–Ret complex
can also form in the absence of GDNF, thus anticipating a
complex regulation of Ret function [6]. Phosphorylated
tyrosine residues of Ret serve as anchoring points for
adaptor proteins that initiate several signaling pathways
(Figure 1). A second signaling mode for GDNF is via the
alternative receptor, the neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM); although NCAM can directly bind GDNF, the
presence of the GFRa1 co-receptor is required for highaffinity binding and activation of downstream signaling
[7]. Formation of the GDNF–GFRa1–NCAM complex leads
to activation of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and Fyn
kinase, which control neuronal migration [5]. The existence of yet unidentified additional receptor(s) for GDNF
has been postulated [8]. A unique property of GDNF,
observed in hippocampal neurons, is to promote synaptogenesis by interacting with GFRa1 and promoting GFRa1mediated homophilic cell–cell interactions [9]. The relevance of this novel ligand-induced cell adhesion system for
dopaminergic synapses is currently unknown.
Compelling genetic evidence suggests a physiological
role for GDNF in the maintenance and function of the
aging NSS. Aging (12–20-month-old) mice heterozygous
89

()TD$FIG][ Review

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

(a)
Ret

GDNF

Ret

Ret

Ret

GDNF sGFRα1

GFRα1
Ret
P
P
P
P

P
P
FRS2 P
P

Src

P
P
P
P

P
P

Ras SOS Grb2

GFRα1

P

PLC-γ P

Shc
Grb2

PKC
IRS1/2

Raf

GFRα1

Gab1

Ca2 + homeostasis

PI3K

PDK1

mLST8
mTOR

Dok1
MEK

SIN1
Rictor

Akt

JNK

Dok4/5

mTOR
ERK
STAT3
BAD

RSK

Caspase
9

IkB
NFkB

Enigma

GSK3
FOXO

p53

14-3-3

14-3-3

CREB

Growth
metabolism

BAD
14-3-3

Survival
oxidative stress response

Survival

(b)
Retrograde signaling

Caspase
9

(c)
Signaling endosome Ret

Lipid bilayer

Ret

(d)

Ret-independent GDNF signaling

NCAM
Ras signaling

PI3K signaling

GDNF-induced cell
adhesion

Pre-synaptic cell

GDNF
Ras

PI3K
Gab1

Shc P

Grb2

P
P
P

PLC-γ

GFRα1

SOS
FRS2
P
Grb2
P
P
P

GDNF

Dynein-dynactin
complex

GFRα1

GFRα1
Fyn

FAK

Neurite outgrowth

Post-synaptic cell

Synaptogenesis

Microtubule network
TRENDS in Neurosciences

Figure 1. Overview of GDNF signaling. (a) Upper left: GDNF signaling via the Ret receptor tyrosine kinase involves the initial interaction between GDNF and membranebound GFRa1 (located in lipid rafts). The GDNF–GFRa1 complex recruits Ret into lipid rafts and potentiates Ret downstream signaling. Upper right: an alternative mode for
activation of Ret is via soluble GFRa1 (sGFRa1), which binds GDNF and activates Ret in trans (initially outside lipid rafts). Middle: activated Ret initiates several signaling
pathways, including Ras–ERK, PI3K–Akt, Src and PLC-g–PKC, which regulate diverse processes, including neuron survival. PI3K–Akt and Ras–ERK signaling might promote
survival by phosphorylating several downstream targets, including transcription factors [p53, cAMP response element binding protein (CREB) and forkhead box O (FOXO)],
transcription factor inhibitors [the inhibitor IkB of nuclear factor-kB (NFkB)] and pro-apoptotic proteins [e.g. caspases, BAD and glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3)]; these
targets have not been validated in dopaminergic neurons. Several proteins [including the insulin receptor substrate 1/2 (IRS1/2); downstream of kinase 1/4/5 (Dok1/4/5);
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) or Enigma] are also recruited downstream of activated Ret, but the outcomes of these interactions are poorly
understood. It remains to be determined whether all or a subset of these interactions promote survival of dopaminergic neurons. (b) Regulation of neuronal survival by
GDNF involves not only local signaling (at axon terminals), but also long-range signaling, via retrograde transport from axon terminals into the cell body. The GDNF–Ret
complex is endocytosed and the ensuing signaling endosomes (pink dots on the left and enlarged view on the right), which carry numerous signaling components, are
anchored to the microtubule network (by anchoring proteins such as dynein–dynactin) and transported towards the soma. (c) In cells that are devoid of Ret, GDNF uses
NCAM as an alternative receptor. Although GDNF can directly bind NCAM, initial binding to GFRa1 enhances its affinity for NCAM, which recruits the Fyn or FAK kinase to
control neurite outgrowth. It is unknown whether this process occurs in dopaminergic neurons, which express both Ret and NCAM. (d) In hippocampal neurons, GDNF
recruits pre- and post-synaptic GFRa1 to promote GFRa1-mediated homophilic cell adhesion, which controls synaptogenesis. It is currently unclear whether such a
mechanism also operates at synapses involving dopaminergic neurons.

for either GDNF [10] or GFRa1 [11] display a subtle loss of
neurons in the SN. Knock-in mice carrying constitutively
active Ret (RetMEN2B) exhibit an increase (26%) in SN [but
not in ventral tegmental area (VTA)] neurons and enhanced levels of striatal dopamine, indicating that Ret
has a potent effect on SN neurons [12]. The analysis of
animals completely lacking GDNF/Ret signaling components has been complicated by the early lethality associated with constitutive inactivation of GDNF, GFRa1or Ret
90

[5]. To circumvent this early lethality, GDNF function has
been constitutively removed from early adulthood onwards, using tamoxifen-induced Esr1-Cre-mediated excision. Although GDNF expression in the brain was
decreased by only 60%, a severe degeneration of SN and
VTA dopaminergic neurons and of locus coeruleus (LC)
noradrenergic neurons was found after 5 months of age,
which was associated with progressive hypokinesia [13].
One study in which Ret was ablated during embryonic

Review
development using a dopaminergic-specific Cre line found
no neurodegenerative signs in 8–12-month-old mice [14].
In a more recent study using a similar approach, a moderate degeneration in the SN and a marked degeneration of
dopaminergic nerve terminals in the striatum of 12–24month-old animals were observed [15]. These findings
establish Ret as a crucial regulator of long-term maintenance of the NSS. They also suggest that: (i) GDNF signals
via its alternative receptor NCAM to promote survival of
SN, VTA and/or LC neurons; and (ii) embryonic inactivation of Ret induces compensatory changes in dopaminergic
neurons that are not triggered upon the removal of GDNF
function at a later developmental time point.
It is currently unclear how GDNF-deprived SN neurons
succumb to neurodegeneration. Results obtained with cultured embryonic dopaminergic neurons deprived of GDNF
indicate that these neurons die via a death receptor- and
caspase-dependent, but mitochondria-independent, pathway [16], suggesting that GDNF promotes neuronal survival by inhibiting the death receptor pathway. The molecular
mechanisms underlying the pro-survival function of GDNF
in aging SN neurons are difficult to address in vivo, partly
because of practical restrictions imposed by the aging process. In cultured neurons, GDNF, similar to other NTFs,
activates several pro-survival pathways, including the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, Ras/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Src kinase and phospholipase
C-g (PLC-g) pathways (Figure 1) [4,5]. Full activation of Ret
requires its translocation into lipid rafts, which promote its
stability by preventing its proteasomal degradation [17].
Recent evidence suggests that proteasomal degradation of
Ret in distal axons regulates the survival capacity of GDNF
by modulating the amount of active GDNF–GFRa1–Ret
complexes that are retrogradely transported to cell bodies
[18]. Another way to regulate Ret signaling is via the
Sprouty family of proteins, which act at several levels to
inhibit Ret activation and downstream signaling [5]. The
transmembrane leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulinlike domains 1 (Lrig1) protein physically interacts with Ret
and inhibits its function in motor and sympathetic neurons,
although its interaction with Ret in dopaminergic neurons
has not yet been investigated [19]. GFRa1 is also regulated
by endocytosis [20] and by phosphatidylinositol-specific
phospholipase-C, which cleaves off the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor to release soluble GFRa1 [5]. Targeting these endogenous mechanisms that modulate GDNF/
Ret signaling might be of therapeutic interest in relation to
diseased dopaminergic neurons.
CDNF/MANF
CDNF is a novel trophic factor for dopaminergic neurons
that has recently been identified [21]. It is similar to the
previously identified MANF [22] and both factors are
expressed in the mouse NSS [21]. Human CDNF and
MANF share 59% sequence homology and CDNF/MANF
homologs have also been identified in Drosophila and
Caenorhabditis elegans [23]. The Drosophila ortholog,
DmMANF, is important for the maintenance of dopaminergic-positive neurites and dopamine levels, and its inactivation causes non-apoptotic cell death during late
embryonic development [24]. An interesting feature of

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

the CDNF/MANF family is that it lacks survival-promoting activities in peripheral sympathetic and sensory neurons in culture, in contrast to all other NTFs [23]. CDNF
and MANF are structurally unrelated to all known NTFs,
suggesting a novel mechanism of action. Besides being
secreted, these factors are retained within the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), where they might assist protein folding
and mitigate ER stress, thereby preventing neurodegeneration [23]. Additional studies are required to define the
signaling cascades initiated by these new NTFs and their
physiological relevance to aging dopaminergic neurons.
NTFs in pre-clinical and clinical studies of PD
Pre-clinical studies
A commonly used approach to damage the NSS experimentally is to use dopaminergic toxins, such as 1-methyl-4phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) or 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). This leads to an acute and severe
neurodegeneration that is associated with behavioral deficits [25]. The use of NTFs for pharmacological purposes is
limited by the fact that they do not cross the blood–brain
barrier (BBB), have reduced diffusion rates and are rapidly
degraded. NTFs must thus be delivered directly into the
brain, at sufficiently high levels to bypass diffusion and
stability constraints. GDNF and several other NTFs were
found to exert neuroprotective, neurorestorative and stimulatory effects on toxin-treated SN neurons (Table 1)
(reviewed in [26–30]). The newly identified CDNF/MANF
are at least as potent as GDNF in providing neuroprotection and repairing rat SN neurons exposed to 6-OHDA
[21,31]. Interestingly, MANF was transported to the cortex
after striatal injection, in contrast to GDNF and CDNF,
which were transported to the SN [31]. MANF might
therefore exert its functions via a mechanism that is
different from that used by GDNF.
Unlike dopaminergic-specific toxins, the bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) causes dopaminergic neurodegeneration via activation of surrounding glial (mainly
microglial) cells [32]. Glial cell activation (neuroinflammation) is believed to be a contributing factor to PD [33] and
GDNF protects dopaminergic neurons cultured in the
presence of glia against LPS toxicity, by preventing microglia activation [34].
Although the mechanisms underlying the effects of
MANF/CDNF on intoxicated neurons are unknown, those
responsible for the effects of GDNF are beginning to be
elucidated. GDNF protects against MPTP toxicity in mice
and, interestingly, requires transforming growth factor-b
(TGF-b) to exert its protective effect [35]. Ret-deficient SN
neurons are not more sensitive to MPTP toxicity in vivo,
but their axons fail to resprout during recovery [36]. Mice
carrying a constitutively active RetMEN2B receptor also
exhibit the same sensitivity to MPTP as wild-type mice.
Thus, endogenous Ret signaling is neither required nor
sufficient to protect SN neurons from MPTP toxicity, but
mediates neurorestoration of MPTP-damaged axons.
GDNF might therefore use its alternative receptor
(NCAM) to protect against MPTP toxicity. Interestingly,
when 6-OHDA was used to damage the NSS, RetMEN2B
mice displayed increased protection of SN cell bodies, but
not of dopaminergic terminals [37], indicating that the
91

Review
requirements for neuroprotection might depend on the
toxins used to challenge the NSS. The downstream signaling mechanisms that mediate the protective effects of
GDNF remain elusive. Indirect evidence comes from viral-mediated delivery of constitutively active Akt to mice,
which increased SN neuron size and sprouting during
aging and exerted both protective and restorative effects
when adult animals were challenged with 6-OHDA [38].
Akt signaling is thus mediating part of the neuroprotective
and restorative effects of GDNF on diseased neurons.
A major drawback of these studies is the incapacity of
toxin models to mimic PD pathology closely. Whereas
degeneration in PD has an adult onset and is progressive,
toxin-induced degeneration is acute and severe [1]. Therefore, the mechanisms behind NTF action in PD patients
might be different from those in toxin-induced models.
Great effort is currently being directed toward the development of improved animal models of PD. Animals that
carry the same mutations as those found in familial PD
might represent one solution, but such animal models
generally fail to exhibit overt SN degeneration despite
displaying several pathological alterations that parallel
the human disease [1]. For example, combined deletion
of all three PD recessive genes [those encoding DJ-1,
Parkin and PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1)]
did not cause degeneration of aging SN neurons in mice,
suggesting that these genes are dispensable for SN neuron
survival in the mouse [39].
Does reduced NTF support contribute to PD? The experimental evidence that NTF disturbances alone cause
PD is currently weak. A recent study [40] identified one
patient with PD carrying compound heterozygous mutations in Ret and FK506 binding protein 4 (FKBP52) genes.
Combined action of GDNF and nerve growth factor (NGF)
is required to phosphorylate tyrosine 905 of the long
isoform of human Ret (Ret51), which facilitates the interaction between FKBP52 and Ret51; the mutations identified in this patient impaired the formation of the Ret51–
FKBP52 complex, without affecting Ret51 or FKBP52
expression levels. Mutations in GFRa2 (the co-receptor
for NRTN that also binds GDNF) were recently associated
with tardive dyskinesia, a late-onset movement disorder
[41]. Further studies will determine the relevance of endogenous NTFs to the onset and progression of PD.
Although decreased NTF function might not be sufficient to cause PD, genetic inactivation of NTF signaling in
animals carrying PD-associated mutations could be used to
investigate the interplay between NTF signaling and PDassociated proteins. A recent study found that the combined deletion of DJ-1 and Ret caused adult-onset and
progressive degeneration of SN neurons in mice, which
exceeded that seen with Ret inactivation alone. Interestingly, the degeneration was specific to SN neurons that
express the G protein-coupled inwardly rectifying potassium channel (GIRK2) [42], which might be more vulnerable
in PD than the neighboring calbindin-expressing SN neurons [43]. Thus, the survival-promoting activity of PDassociated genes might be revealed in a background of
impaired NTF signaling. However, mice lacking DJ-1
and Ret displayed no accumulation of a-syn and were
not significantly impaired in motor tasks [42], suggesting
92

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

that NTF manipulation can be used to probe a subset of
pathogenic events in nigral disease. Complementary investigations in Drosophila revealed that DJ-1 interacts genetically with Ret-associated Ras/ERK signaling [42]. Thus,
mounting evidence suggests that the cellular processes
controlled by PD-associated genes are connected to NTF
signaling (Box 1; [44]). Collectively, these studies raise
several possibilities. First, PD-associated genes require
an intact NTF network to promote SN neuron survival
during aging. Second, the pathophysiological changes induced by mutations in PD-associated genes decrease the
efficacy of NTF signaling. Third, the shared substrates
between NTFs and PD-associated proteins might represent new targets for drug development in PD.
Clinical studies
Four clinical trials in which GDNF was administered to PD
patients have been conducted so far (Table 2) (reviewed in
[27,28,45–47]). Injection of GDNF into the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) led to no significant improvement, probably
because of its poor penetration from the CSF into the brain
parenchyma [48]. To achieve better penetration, GDNF
was directly infused (using minipumps) into the putamen
in subsequent trials. The second and third open label trials
found a significant clinical improvement [49–51], whereas
the fourth, double-blinded placebo-controlled trial detected
no improvements [52]. Some patients from trial 4 developed antisera against GDNF, although no adverse side
effects were detected [52]. In a parallel study, monkeys
receiving high doses of GDNF (three to four times higher
than those used in human trials) developed cerebellar
lesions [53]. For these reasons, the company that licensed
the use of recombinant GDNF (Amgen) took the decision to
stop clinical work on GDNF. Several possible explanations
for the different outcomes in these trials have been proposed, including differences in GDNF doses or catheter
properties, the choice of patient cohorts or the selection of
inappropriate endpoints. A major limiting factor in the
abovementioned trials was suggested to be the suboptimal
brain delivery of GDNF [27,45,46].
Maximizing the potential of NTFs in PD
The experimental and clinical evidence obtained so far
with NTFs suggests that sustained and localized NTF
delivery is crucial for producing beneficial results. To
achieve this, several strategies for improved NTF delivery
are currently being developed, including the intracranial
delivery of viral vectors, naked and/or encapsulated cells or
microspheres and the intravenous injection of NTFs fused
to antibodies that cross the BBB. In addition, NTF signaling might also be activated using small-molecule agonists
(Figure 2).
Viral vectors
The most promising approach for NTF delivery in PD
patients is gene therapy using recombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) or lentiviruses (LVs) to infect neurons
[28,30,47]. Pre-clinical studies found that AAV–GDNF or
LV–GDNF delivery is sustained and leads to robust GDNF
synthesis in the host brain and, in contrast to the previous
clinical trials using recombinant GDNF, such delivery

Review

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

Box 1. Convergence points between NTF signaling and PD-associated proteins
 Caspases. Mutant LRRK2 interacts with Fas-associated death
domain protein (FADD) to induce caspase-8-mediated cell death in
cultured neurons [108]. Caspase-6-mediated cleavage of DJ-1
generates a C-terminal fragment that translocates to the nucleus
to inhibit p53 and caspase-3 activity [105]. Mutant LRRK2 causes
increased caspase-3 activation, which depends on the presence of
LRR and WD40 domains of LRRK2 [109].
 Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Activation of mTOR by
PI3K/Akt inhibits autophagy and autophagy stimulation (using the
mTOR inhibitor rapamycin) prevented dopaminergic neurodegeneration in Parkin or PINK1 mutant flies [110]. LRRK2 directly
phosphorylates and inactivates the eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E-binding protein (4E-BP), which inhibits translation [111].
Consequently, deletion of Drosophila LRRK2 promoted autophagy
by enhancing 4E-BP activation and suppressed neurodegeneration
in Parkin and PINK1 mutants [110].
 Mitochondria. Parkin has autonomous effects on mitochondrial
mechanisms regulating cytochrome c release in neuroblastoma cell
lines [112]. PINK1 modulates the activity of the mitochondrial
protease HtrA2 by promoting p38-dependent HtrA2 phosphorylation [113].
 Calcium. PINK1 controls mitochondrial Ca2+ efflux by regulating the
Na+–Ca2+ exchanger, thereby preventing mitochondrial overload
with Ca2+ and oxidative stress [114]. Mutant PINK1 or a-syn
increase mitochondrial Ca2+ influx and cause defects in neurite
outgrowth, which could be rescued by blocking the mitochondrial
Ca2+ uptake channel [115]. However, most of these biochemical
interactions await confirmation in SN neurons in vivo.

As detailed below, multiple putative interaction points between
NTF signaling and PD-associated proteins have been identified
(Figure I).
 Ras/ERK. DJ-1 synergizes with Ras and c-Myc to transform
HEK293T cells [94] and cooperates with Ras/ERK signaling in
Drosophila [42]. LRRK2 protects cells from H2O2-induced apoptosis
by activating ERK signaling [95].
 PI3K/Akt. DJ-1 controls PTEN and Akt activity in hypoxic [96] or
stressed [97] cells. At nanomolar concentrations, a-syn might be
protective by stimulating PI3K/Akt signaling [98]. Parkin promotes
PI3K/Akt signaling by preventing the degradation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor [99] and de-represses NF-kB signaling by
inhibiting the negative regulators tumor necrosis factor receptorassociated factor 2 (TRAF2) and inhibitor of kappa B kinase gamma
(IKKg) [100].
 c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). DJ-1 inhibits the pro-apoptotic JNK
signaling by preventing the activation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) by Daxx [101] or by preventing the nuclear
transport of MEK kinase 1 (MEKK1) [102]. Parkin attenuates JNK and
caspase-3 activation to protect against 6-OHDA [44] or rotenone
[103] toxicity.
 p53. DJ-1 inhibits p53 transcriptional activity by directly binding to
p53 [104,105] or by interacting with the Mi-2/nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase (NuRD) complex [106]. Inhibition of p53 by DJ-1
seems to be Akt dependent, but ERK and NFkB independent [105].
Parkin interacts with the p53 promoter and inhibits p53 transcription, in an ubiquitin–ligase-independent manner [107].

[()TD$FIG]
NTF-R
NTF

Dominant PD gene products
Alpha-synuclein
Pre-synaptic terminal protein
LRRK2 (Dardarin)
Multi-domain protein kinase
Recessive PD gene products
Parkin
Ubiquitin E3 ligase
DJ-1
Oxidative stress suppressor
PINK1
Mitochondrial kinase

LRRK2

Trophic
deprivation

PKC

Ca2 + homeostasis

PTEN

PINK1

α-syn

DJ-1

ERK

DJ-1

Mutant
α-syn

Parkin
Caspase
6

Caspase
8

Akt
FOXO

PINK1

Caspase
3

Mutant
LRRK2

NFkB
JNK

mTOR
p53

Parkin

XIAP
4E-BP
DJ-1

HtrA2
SMAC

Parkin

Bax

Cytochrome c release

LRRK2

PINK1
Parkin

TRENDS in Neurosciences

Figure I. The intracellular signaling pathways activated following NTF binding to an NTF receptor (NTF-R) might share common targets with PD-associated proteins.

resulted in a good diffusion capacity for GDNF, with large
territories being occupied in the target area [47]. Viralmediated GDNF delivery consistently exerted neuroprotective, neurorestorative and stimulatory effects in rodents
or monkeys intoxicated with either 6-OHDA or MPTP
[28,30,54–58]. In contrast to those studies, LV–GDNF
did not prevent SN degeneration in rats injected with
LV–a-syn [59], although this result awaits independent

replication. NRTN also showed promising results in toxintreated animals, but only after its pre-pro-domain was
replaced with that of NGF, to ensure enhanced secretion
[60]. Delivery of AAV2–NRTN (CERE-120) to naı̈ve [60,61]
or MPTP-treated monkeys [62] stimulated DA synthesis
and was neuroprotective and neurorestorative in the latter
study. Intraputaminal delivery of AAV2–NRTN was found
to be safe and improved motor function in an open label,
93

Review

94

Table 2. Clinical trials with neurotrophic factors and neurotrophic factor inducers in PDa
Drug class
Substance
Trial type
Trial phase
Duration (months)
Delivery mode
Daily dose
Number of
participants
Age (years)
Time since
diagnosis (years)
Clinical benefits? h
Side effects j
Trial ID m
Refs.

NTF
GDNF b
MRDBPC c
I/II
6–8
ICV d
N/A
50

GDNF b
OL
I
12–24
IPu e
14–43.2 mg
5

GDNF b
OL
I
6
IPu e
3–30 mg
10

GDNF b
MRDBPC
I/II
6
IPu e
15 mg
33

AAV2-NRTN
OL
I
12
IPu f
N/A
12

AAV2-NRTN
MDBSSC
II
12–18
IPu g
N/A
58

MAO-B I/NTF inducer
Rasagiline
DBPCDST
I/II
18
Oral
1 or 2 mg
1176

Rasagiline
DBPCDST
I/II
12
Oral
1 or 2 mg
371

NTF inducer
Cogane
RDBPC
I
1
Oral
N/A
N/A

58  8
11  6

54.2  6
19  9.8

57.9  9.3
8.7  3.6

56  7.2
9.7  3.9

57  8
11  3

60  7
10  3

62  9
0.3  0.3

60  10
11

N/A
N/A

No
LSk and WL
N/A
[48]

Yes
LS k
NCT00111982
[49,50]

Yes
LSk and H
NCT00006488
[51]

No
LSk and H
NCT00115427
[52] n

Yes
H
NCT00252850
[63]

No i
H and Tu l
NCT00400634
[64] o

Yes (1 mg)/No (2 mg)
NS
NCT00256204
[83]

Yes
NS
NCT00203060
[84] p

N/A
N/A
NCT00875316
N/A

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

a
Abbreviations: H, headaches; ICV, intracerebroventricular delivery; IPu, intraputaminal delivery; LS, Lhermitte’s sign; MAO-B I, monoamine oxidase type B inhibitor; MDBSSC, multi-center, double-blind, sham-surgery controlled trial;
MRDBPC, multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial; N/A, not applicable or not available; NS, not significant; RDBPC, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial; Tu, tumors; WL, weight loss.
b
Recombinant human methionyl GDNF (r-mehHuGNDF).
c
This MRDBPC trial was followed by an OL on 16 PD patients who received up to 4-mg GDNF for an additional 20 months; no improvements were observed.
d
Drug injected (6–8 times; in total 25–4000-mg GDNF).
e
Delivered via minipump.
f
Recombinant virus was injected once (dose: 1.3  1011 or 5.4  1011 viral genomes).
g
Recombinant virus was injected once (dose: 5.4  1011 viral genomes).
h
Clinical improvement was assessed using the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS); note that other functional and non-motor criteria have been used in some of these studies.
i
A modest improvement of AAV2-NRTN treatment was observed after 18 months in a subset of participants that had double-blind assessments after 12 months.
j
Only the most prevalent side effects are listed; for a complete list, see cited references.
k
LS represents a sudden but transient electric shock that extends down the spine and is triggered by flexing the head forward.
l
Three AAV2-treated patients and two controls receiving sham surgery developed tumors; tumors in the AAV2-NRTN group are thought to be unrelated to the presence of AAV2-NRTN.
m
Source: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov.
n
A new clinical trial with recombinant GDNF is expected to begin soon [65].
o
A new trial, in which a higher (fourfold) dose of AAV2-NRTN will be delivered to both the putamen and the SN is underway [65].
p
This trial was continued as an OL for an additional 5.5 years, and the clinical benefits of early rasagiline treatment were maintained [85].

()TD$FIG][ Review

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

c. Small molecules that activate GDNF signaling
De-repress Ret signaling

Ret

Ret

Activate Ret signaling

(Lrig1/Sprouty inhibitors)
Lrig1

(GDNF/Ret/GFRα1 mimetics)

a. Direct infusion (minipumps)
Recombinant GDNF
Catheter

Inhibitor

Pump

Sprouty
(Sprouty inhibitor)

(Lrig1 inhibitor)

Akt

(Antagonists for Akt inhibitors)

Activator

e. Viral vectors

(Agonists for Akt activators)

Molecules that enhance GDNF synthesis: Rasagiline, Cogane
GDNF

Blood-brain barrier
Lentiviruses
LTR ψ RRE cPPT Promoter GDNF WPRE LTR

Naked cells producing GDNF

Capsule

Adeno-associated viruses
ITR Promoter GDNF ITR

GDNF

GDNF
Brain
Selective membrane

Blood-brain barrier
Encapsulated cells producing GDNF
b. Naked/encapsulated cells

Degradation

Endothelial cells

IR

Blood

Mab HIR

Polymer

GDNF

f. Microspheres

GDNF-Mab HIR chimera
GDNF
d. “Trojan horse”- mediated delivery
TRENDS in Neurosciences

Figure 2. Ways to activate NTF signaling in the nigrostriatal system: the example of GDNF. (a) Direct infusion of recombinant GDNF into the brain parenchyma or the
cerebrospinal fluid (not shown) is facilitated by the use of minipumps. (b) Cells engineered ex vivo to produce GDNF continuously can be implanted as such (naked cells) or
encapsulated into catheter-like devices made of polymers, which are permeable to nutrients and enable outward diffusion of newly produced GDNF (encapsulated cells). (c)
Small molecules that target diverse aspects of GDNF signaling can be used to enhance GDNF signaling. These molecules (or their metabolites) must be able to pass the
BBB. Molecules that resemble GDNF (green) or that bind and activate Ret (yellow) or GFRa1 (orange) can mimic GDNF action. Molecules that antagonize negative regulators
of GDNF–Ret signaling, such as Lrig1 (black) or Sprouty (grey), or which antagonize (blue) or activate (pink) inhibitors or activators of Ret-downstream effectors (e.g. Akt)
might also mimic activation of GDNF–Ret signaling. Small compounds, such as rasagiline or coganeTM, stimulate NTF (including GDNF) production. Given the potential risk
for side effects associated with widespread activation of GDNF signaling, small compounds that target GDNF signaling specifically in dopaminergic neurons might be more
advantageous. (d) The use of molecular ‘Trojan horses’ might facilitate the entry of NTFs into the brain. For example, the N-terminus of GDNF can be fused to the Cterminus of the heavy chain of a monoclonal antibody directed against the human insulin receptor (Mab HIR) to generate a chimeric protein (GDNF-Mab HIR). Following
intravenous injection, the chimera binds the HIR, which facilitates its transport across the BBB. Once in the brain, the N-terminus of GDNF recruits GFRa1 and activates Ret
signaling. A major caveat of this approach is the widespread delivery of GDNF throughout the brain, which might cause side effects. (e) Viral vectors enable the in vivo
delivery of GDNF by introducing the gene that encodes it into striatal neurons. Lentiviruses (LVs) carry the GDNF cDNA surrounded by viral long terminal repeats (LTRs),
packaging signal (c), the rev responsive element (RRE) required for nuclear export of RNA, the central polypurine tract (cPPT) that enhances the nuclear import of dsDNA, a
promoter, and a woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional regulatory element (WPRE) that increases the nuclear export of GDNF mRNA. Adeno-associated viruses
(AAVs) contain inverted terminal repeats (ITR), the GDNF transgene and a promoter. Both LVs and AAVs are produced in cell lines by co-transfection of plasmids containing
the GDNF transgene and packaging plasmids. (f) Microspheres that bind or entrap GDNF can be implanted into the putamen, where they are degraded and GDNF is
released. Given that microspheres can pass the BBB, they can also be injected intravenously (not shown).

95

Review
phase I human trial, one year post-administration [63]
(Table 2). However, phase II testing on an extended cohort
failed to show significant improvements [64] and postmortem evidence indicated that NRTN showed poor diffusion into the tissue [64,65]. While a new trial with AAV2–
NRTN is underway (cited in [65]), three other recombinant
AAVs (encoding metabolic enzymes that act to enhance
dopaminergic neuron function or which normalize the
activity of the basal ganglia) are currently being tested
in phase I/II trials [2,47].
Naked or encapsulated cells
Cells engineered ex vivo to secrete NTFs represent another
delivery strategy. Human neural progenitor cells producing GDNF transplanted into the rat striatum populated
most of the target area and mitigated 6-OHDA-induced
neurodegeneration [66]. Bone marrow stem cell-derived
macrophages are able to cross the BBB and LV-transduced
macrophages producing GDNF protected SN neurons from
MPTP toxicity in rats [67]. Another strategy is to use
encapsulated cell biodelivery (ECB) that, in contrast to
naked cells, uses cells encapsulated in catheter-like
devices made of polymers; these devices ensure a local
NTF delivery and can be removed surgically if desired
[68]. ECB of GDNF alleviated SN neurodegeneration in
6-OHDA-treated rats [69]. However, it only provided transient motor improvements in MPTP-treated monkeys,
probably because the intraventricular grafting did not
enable sufficient GDNF to diffuse from the CSF into the
brain [70].
Microspheres
Submicroscopic spherical assemblies consisting of natural
or synthetic polymer aggregates can be used to attach or
entrap NTFs. These nanoparticles can cross the BBB, are
biodegradable and enable the slow release of NTF into the
desired area. GDNF released from polymeric lactide–coglycolide acid (PLGA) microspheres implanted in the striatum was neuroprotective [71] and neurorestorative [72] in
6-OHDA-treated rats. Similarly, lactoferrin-bound GDNF,
given intraperitoneally or intravenously, protected dopaminergic neurons from 6-OHDA [73] or rotenone [74]
toxicity in rats. Further pre-clinical studies are required
to assess the safety and efficacy of this peripheral delivery
approach.
‘Trojan horse’-mediated delivery
Another approach for NTF delivery into the CNS is the
intravenous administration of a chimeric protein comprising the NTF and a so-called ‘molecular Trojan horse’, for
example a monoclonal antibody (MAb) to the human insulin receptor (HIR) that facilitates the receptor-mediated
passage of the chimera across the BBB. Rhesus monkeys
injected intravenously with a GDNF–MabHIR chimera
displayed increased brain uptake of GDNF, without side
effects, 2 weeks after administration [75]; a phase I safety
trial in humans is now underway [65]. A major drawback of
these peripheral delivery approaches is the widespread
delivery of GDNF throughout the CNS, which might cause
unwanted side effects. A possible solution for this has
recently been tested in rats via the use of Trojan horse
96

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

liposomes to deliver a plasmid in which the GDNF gene is
placed downstream of a dopaminergic-specific promoter
[76].
NTF agonists
Another strategy to activate NTF signaling is to use smallmolecule NTF agonists. DNSP-11 is a small peptide from
the pro-GDNF domain that stimulates and restores SN
neurons after 6-OHDA damage in vivo [77]. Interestingly,
it does not bind GFRa1 but interacts with several metabolic proteins and might thus exhibit neurotrophic activities through GFRa1-independent pathways [77]. The small
nonpeptidyl compound XIB4035 is a weak agonist for
GFRa1 and stimulates Ret autophosphorylation and neurite outgrowth in neuroblastoma cells [78], although this
compound has yet to be tested in vivo. A high-affinity TrkB
agonist, 7,8-dihidroxyflavone, stimulates TrkB autophosphorylation and signaling in vivo and protects SN neurons
in MPTP-treated mice [79]. Several natural compounds
and pharmacological agents were found to increase NTF
production [80]. Rasagiline is one such compound that,
although functioning as a monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B)
inhibitor, also upregulates GDNF and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) production [81] and is neuroprotective in MPTP-treated mice and monkeys [82]. In two
delayed-start clinical trials, rasagiline showed positive
results [83–85] (Table 2), which might reflect potential
disease-modifying effects [86,87]. Another orally active
compound is PYM50028 (CoganeTM), which increases
GDNF and BDNF expression and exhibits neuroprotective
and neurorestorative effects in MPTP-treated mice [88];
this compound is now in Phase I clinical testing (Table 2).
Finally, new compounds that activate NTF signaling specifically in dopaminergic neurons (or are targeted to these
neurons specifically) might prove useful for therapy and
the identification of dopaminergic-specific NTF interactors
might facilitate the screening for such compounds.
Conclusions and perspectives
Pre-clinical studies have uncovered a promising potential
for NTFs to repair the damaged NSS system and to reverse
motor deficits in parkinsonian animal models. The lack of
definitive therapeutic effects in human trials should not be
seen as complete failure, but rather as an opportunity to
improve theoretical and practical approaches to NTF therapeutic strategies (Box 2). One of the most pressing questions is to understand how NTFs impact on aging and
diseased dopaminergic neurons. It is possible that the
aging human brain has a decreased capacity to respond
to NTFs, which is further impaired by disease. In addition,
the effects of NTFs on other neuronal populations should
be characterized. Given the plethora of NTFs and their
complex roles in the brain, it remains possible that these
factors can be used to repair neuronal populations outside
of the NSS that become affected in PD and which are
responsible for the non-motor manifestations of PD. This
knowledge could also be used to maximize the therapeutic
effect and to minimize side effects following NTF delivery.
The continuing investigations into the basic biology of
NTFs and their behavior in pre-clinical experiments will
unravel the complex molecular interplay between NTFs

Review

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2

Box 2. Outstanding questions
 How do NTFs interact with the cellular machinery that regulates
aging? The aging brain might have a reduced capacity to respond to
NTF stimulation, and this might limit the efficacy of NTF therapies
for PD. Several mechanisms that regulate aging in model organisms have been identified [89], and it would be interesting to
determine whether and how NTF action is altered by these factors.
 What are the effects of NTFs on non-dopaminergic neurons? Which
of these effects might be deleterious when administering NTFs to
patients with PD? Alternatively, these effects might have positive
therapeutic benefits for treating the non-motor symptoms of PD.
 Can genetic manipulation of NTF signaling pathways in animal
models mimic aspects of PD?
 Is it possible to model the action of NTFs on dysfunctional
dopaminergic neurons? The use of large-scale approaches (i.e.
proteomics and transcriptomics) might facilitate the in silico
analysis of dopaminergic neuron responses to injury and to NTFs,
and might lead to the identification of new therapeutic targets that
modulate the NTF system.
 Is reduced neurotrophic support a cause of PD?
 Are the current criteria for clinical evaluation of PD [e.g. the Unified
Parkinson’s disease rating scale (UPDRS)] sensitive enough to
enable the detection of disease-modifying effects? Or are more
sensitive clinical indicators needed?
 How early can PD be detected? Although an accurate diagnosis of
PD is currently difficult, most cases already display >60–70% loss of
SN neurons and >80% loss of dopamine before being clinically
detected [25]. Under these conditions, there is little room for
neuroprotective effects. Therefore, achieving neuroprotection with
NTFs urgently requires validated biomarkers to detect pre-symptomatic stages of PD.

and pathological processes in PD. The creation of a common database with results from standardized experiments
could result in a systems biology approach in experimental
PD. Mathematical models of NTF action could then be used
to predict and test new cellular targets.
A major challenge is to develop animal models that
mimic PD pathology more closely. The currently available toxin models might be more efficient at developing
symptomatic treatment approaches rather than NTF
therapies. One potential avenue for the development of
improved PD models represents the genetic manipulation of pathways that regulate life span in laboratory
animals [89]. Aging is the most important risk factor in
PD and its experimental manipulation (in neurons already affected by other pathogenic processes linked to
PD) might generate improved models of PD. Another
urgent need in experimental and clinical studies is the
detection of the initial stages of nigral dysfunction, where
NTF action is expected to be most powerful. The development of biomarkers should facilitate the design of
clinical trials evaluating neuroprotective NTF therapies.
Such trials should have increased durations, extended
cohorts and an improved design (see, for example, the
delayed-start design [83,90]), to enable sensitive detection of disease-modifying effects. Whether NTF therapies
alone or in combination with other treatments will prevent, delay or stop the progression of PD remains to be
determined. The impressive amount of data accumulated
so far will undoubtedly fuel many years of sustained
efforts, which might enable NTFs to exit the experimental field and enter the clinic as valuable disease-modifying therapeutics.

 How can the diffusion of GDNF or NRTN into the brain parenchyma
be improved? These two factors have reduced diffusion capacity,
which might contribute to their failure in clinical trials. Mutant
proteins that have reduced affinity for heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) could be generated and tested in vivo; however,
caution should be exerted as complete disruption of HSPG binding
might abolish neuroprotection [116]. The new NTFs (CDNF and
MANF) have better diffusion capacities [31] and might be good
alternatives for future trials.
 Is long-term expression of NTFs using LVs or AAVs safe in humans,
or should a regulatory system that can shut off transgene
expression be used? Although AAVs appear to be safe in ongoing
human trials [63], and no safety concerns arose from the pre-clinical
use of LVs [30], future generations of viral vectors that are
engineered with the possibility to turn off gene expression, might
be highly desirable. One approach that has been tested experimentally is the use of dietary doxycyline, which was used to turn off the
expression of a GDNF transgene that was downstream of a reverse
tetracycline promoter in AAV–GDNF-infected rats [117].
 Is a combination of several NTFs more efficient in protecting,
repairing and activating dopaminergic neurons in the diseased
brain compared with a single NTF? GDNF requires TGF-b to exert its
neuroprotective effects [35]; thus TGF-b might be valuable clinically
for enhancing the effects of GDNF.
 Is NTF therapy sufficient to protect from PD completely and/or
repair the parkinsonian brain? Is the use of NTFs in conjunction with
other therapies (e.g. gene therapy with AAVs that carry metabolic
enzymes to enhance dopaminergic function, or cell therapies, such
as stem cell transplantation [2,118]) a potential therapeutic avenue
in PD?

Acknowledgements
We thank Mart Saarma, Pontus Klein and Daniel Nagel for critically
reading the manuscript. Work in the lab is supported by the Max-Planck
Society and by grants from the European Union (NeuroNE, MOLPARK)
and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB596).

References
1 Dawson, T.M. et al. (2010) Genetic animal models of Parkinson’s
disease. Neuron 66, 646–661
2 Obeso, J.A. et al. (2010) Missing pieces in the Parkinson’s disease
puzzle. Nat. Med. 16, 653–661
3 Lin, L.F. et al. (1993) GDNF: a glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor for midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Science 260, 1130–1132
4 Airaksinen, M.S. and Saarma, M. (2002) The GDNF family:
signalling, biological functions and therapeutic value. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 3, 383–394
5 Paratcha, G. and Ledda, F. (2008) GDNF and GFRalpha: a versatile
molecular complex for developing neurons. Trends Neurosci. 31, 384–
391
6 Bespalov, M.M. and Saarma, M. (2007) GDNF family receptor
complexes are emerging drug targets. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 28,
68–74
7 Ibanez, C.F. (2010) Beyond the cell surface: new mechanisms of
receptor function. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 396, 24–27
8 Pozas, E. and Ibanez, C.F. (2005) GDNF and GFRalpha1 promote
differentiation and tangential migration of cortical GABAergic
neurons. Neuron 45, 701–713
9 Ledda, F. et al. (2007) GDNF and GFRalpha1 promote formation of
neuronal synapses by ligand-induced cell adhesion. Nat. Neurosci. 10,
293–300
10 Boger, H.A. et al. (2006) A partial GDNF depletion leads to earlier agerelated deterioration of motor function and tyrosine hydroxylase
expression in the substantia nigra. Exp. Neurol. 202, 336–347
11 Zaman, V. et al. (2008) The nigrostriatal dopamine system of aging
GFRalpha-1 heterozygous mice: neurochemistry, morphology and
behavior. Eur. J. Neurosci. 28, 1557–1568
12 Mijatovic, J. et al. (2007) Constitutive Ret activity in knock-in
multiple endocrine neoplasia type B mice induces profound

97

Review
elevation of brain dopamine concentration via enhanced synthesis
and increases the number of TH-positive cells in the substantia nigra.
J. Neurosci. 27, 4799–4809
13 Pascual, A. et al. (2008) Absolute requirement of GDNF for adult
catecholaminergic neuron survival. Nat. Neurosci. 11, 755–761
14 Jain, S. et al. (2006) RET is dispensable for maintenance of
midbrain dopaminergic neurons in adult mice. J. Neurosci. 26,
11230–11238
15 Kramer, E.R. et al. (2007) Absence of Ret signaling in mice causes
progressive and late degeneration of the nigrostriatal system. PLoS
Biol. 5, e39
16 Yu, L.Y. et al. (2008) Death receptors and caspases but not
mitochondria are activated in the GDNF- or BDNF-deprived
dopaminergic neurons. J. Neurosci. 28, 7467–7475
17 Pierchala, B.A. et al. (2006) Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factordependent recruitment of Ret into lipid rafts enhances signaling by
partitioning Ret from proteasome-dependent degradation. J.
Neurosci. 26, 2777–2787
18 Tsui, C.C. and Pierchala, B.A. (2010) The differential axonal
degradation of Ret accounts for cell-type-specific function of glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor as a retrograde survival factor.
J. Neurosci. 30, 5149–5158
19 Ledda, F. et al. (2008) Lrig1 is an endogenous inhibitor of Ret receptor
tyrosine kinase activation, downstream signaling, and biological
responses to GDNF. J. Neurosci. 28, 39–49
20 Vieira, P. et al. (2003) Internalization of glial cell-derived
neurotrophic factor receptor GFR alpha 1 in the absence of the ret
tyrosine kinase coreceptor. Cell Mol. Neurobiol. 23, 43–55
21 Lindholm, P. et al. (2007) Novel neurotrophic factor CDNF
protects and rescues midbrain dopamine neurons in vivo. Nature
448, 73–77
22 Petrova, P. et al. (2003) MANF: a new mesencephalic, astrocytederived neurotrophic factor with selectivity for dopaminergic
neurons. J. Mol. Neurosci. 20, 173–188
23 Lindholm, P. and Saarma, M. (2010) Novel CDNF/MANF family of
neurotrophic factors. Dev. Neurobiol. 70, 360–371
24 Palgi, M. et al. (2009) Evidence that DmMANF is an invertebrate
neurotrophic factor supporting dopaminergic neurons. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 2429–2434
25 Dauer, W. and Przedborski, S. (2003) Parkinson’s disease:
mechanisms and models. Neuron 39, 889–909
26 Andressoo, J.O. and Saarma, M. (2008) Signalling mechanisms
underlying development and maintenance of dopamine neurons.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 18, 297–306
27 Evans, J.R. and Barker, R.A. (2008) Neurotrophic factors as a
therapeutic target for Parkinson’s disease. Expert Opin. Ther.
Targets 12, 437–447
28 Deierborg, T. et al. (2008) Emerging restorative treatments for
Parkinson’s disease. Prog. Neurobiol. 85, 407–432
29 Peterson, A.L. and Nutt, J.G. (2008) Treatment of Parkinson’s disease
with trophic factors. Neurotherapeutics 5, 270–280
30 Bjorklund, T. and Kordower, J.H. (2010) Gene therapy for Parkinson’s
disease. Mov. Disord. 25 (Suppl. 1), S161–S173
31 Voutilainen, M.H. et al. (2009) Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived
neurotrophic factor is neurorestorative in rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. J. Neurosci. 29, 9651–9659
32 Dutta, G. et al. (2008) The lipopolysaccharide Parkinson’s disease
animal model: mechanistic studies and drug discovery. Fundam. Clin.
Pharmacol. 22, 453–464
33 Glass, C.K. et al. (2010) Mechanisms underlying inflammation in
neurodegeneration. Cell 140, 918–934
34 Xing, B. et al. (2010) Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
protects midbrain dopaminergic neurons against lipopolysaccharide
neurotoxicity. J. Neuroimmunol. 225, 43–51
35 Schober, A. et al. (2007) GDNF applied to the MPTP-lesioned
nigrostriatal system requires TGF-beta for its neuroprotective
action. Neurobiol. Dis. 25, 378–391
36 Kowsky, S. et al. (2007) RET signaling does not modulate MPTP
toxicity but is required for regeneration of dopaminergic axon
terminals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 104, 20049–20054
37 Mijatovic, J. et al. (2009) Constitutive Ret signaling is protective for
dopaminergic cell bodies but not for axonal terminals. Neurobiol.
Aging. DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.08.009

98

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2
38 Ries, V. et al. (2006) Oncoprotein Akt/PKB induces trophic effects in
murine models of Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
103, 18757–18762
39 Kitada, T. et al. (2009) Absence of nigral degeneration in aged parkin/
DJ-1/PINK1 triple knockout mice. J. Neurochem. 111, 696–702
40 Fusco, D. et al. (2010) The RET51/FKBP52 complex and its
involvement in Parkinson disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 19, 2804–2816
41 Souza, R.P. et al. (2010) Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
receptor alpha 2 (GFRA2) gene is associated with tardive dyskinesia.
Psychopharmacology 210, 347–354
42 Aron, L. et al. (2010) Pro-survival role for Parkinson’s associated gene
DJ-1 revealed in trophically impaired dopaminergic neurons. PLoS
Biol. 8, e1000349
43 Chung, C.Y. et al. (2005) Cell type-specific gene expression of
midbrain dopaminergic neurons reveals molecules involved in their
vulnerability and protection. Hum. Mol. Genet. 14, 1709–1725
44 Burke, R.E. (2008) Programmed cell death and new discoveries in the
genetics of parkinsonism. J. Neurochem. 104, 875–890
45 Barker, R.A. (2006) Continuing trials of GDNF in Parkinson’s disease.
Lancet Neurol. 5, 285–286
46 Barker, R.A. (2009) Parkinson’s disease and growth factors – are they
the answer? Parkinsonism. Relat. Disord. 15 (Suppl. 3), S181–S184
47 Bjorklund, T. and Kirik, D. (2009) Scientific rationale for the
development of gene therapy strategies for Parkinson’s disease.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1792, 703–713
48 Nutt, J.G. et al. (2003) Randomized, double-blind trial of glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in PD. Neurology 60, 69–73
49 Gill, S.S. et al. (2003) Direct brain infusion of glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor in Parkinson disease. Nat. Med. 9, 589–595
50 Patel, N.K. et al. (2005) Intraputamenal infusion of glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor in PD: a two-year outcome study. Ann.
Neurol. 57, 298–302
51 Slevin, J.T. et al. (2005) Improvement of bilateral motor functions in
patients with Parkinson disease through the unilateral
intraputaminal infusion of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor. J. Neurosurg. 102, 216–222
52 Lang, A.E. et al. (2006) Randomized controlled trial of intraputamenal
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor infusion in Parkinson
disease. Ann. Neurol. 59, 459–466
53 Hovland, D.N., Jr et al. (2007) Six-month continuous intraputamenal
infusion toxicity study of recombinant methionyl human glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor (r-metHuGDNF) in rhesus monkeys.
Toxicol. Pathol. 35, 676–692
54 Eberling, J.L. et al. (2009) Functional effects of AAV2-GDNF on the
dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway in parkinsonian rhesus
monkeys. Hum. Gene. Ther. 20, 511–518
55 Eslamboli, A. et al. (2005) Continuous low-level glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor delivery using recombinant adeno-associated
viral vectors provides neuroprotection and induces behavioral
recovery in a primate model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 25,
769–777
56 Eslamboli, A. et al. (2003) Recombinant adeno-associated viral vector
(rAAV) delivery of GDNF provides protection against 6-OHDA lesion
in the common marmoset monkey (Callithrix jacchus). Exp. Neurol.
184, 536–548
57 Kirik, D. et al. (2000) Long-term rAAV-mediated gene transfer of
GDNF in the rat Parkinson’s model: intrastriatal but not intranigral
transduction promotes functional regeneration in the lesioned
nigrostriatal system. J. Neurosci. 20, 4686–4700
58 Emborg, M.E. et al. (2009) Response of aged parkinsonian monkeys to
in vivo gene transfer of GDNF. Neurobiol. Dis. 36, 303–311
59 Lo Bianco, C. et al. (2004) Lentiviral nigral delivery of GDNF does not
prevent neurodegeneration in a genetic rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 17, 283–289
60 Herzog, C.D. et al. (2008) Transgene expression, bioactivity, and
safety of CERE-120 (AAV2-neurturin) following delivery to the
monkey striatum. Mol.Ther. 16, 1737–1744
61 Herzog, C.D. et al. (2009) Expression, bioactivity, and safety 1 year
after adeno-associated viral vector type 2-mediated delivery of
neurturin to the monkey nigrostriatal system support cere-120 for
Parkinson’s disease. Neurosurgery 64, 602–612 discussion 612–603
62 Kordower, J.H. et al. (2006) Delivery of neurturin by AAV2 (CERE120)-mediated gene transfer provides structural and functional

Review
neuroprotection and neurorestoration in MPTP-treated monkeys.
Ann. Neurol. 60, 706–715
63 Marks, W.J., Jr et al. (2008) Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal
delivery of CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus serotype 2-neurturin)
to patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: an open-label, phase I
trial. Lancet Neurol. 7, 400–408
64 Marks, W.J., Jr et al. (2010) Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for
Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind, randomised, controlled trial.
Lancet Neurol. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70254-44
65 Vastag, B. (2010) Biotechnology: crossing the barrier. Nature 466,
916–918
66 Behrstock, S. et al. (2006) Human neural progenitors deliver glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor to parkinsonian rodents and aged
primates. Gene. Ther. 13, 379–388
67 Biju, K. et al. (2010) Macrophage-mediated GDNF delivery protects
against dopaminergic neurodegeneration: a therapeutic strategy for
Parkinson’s disease. Mol. Ther. 18, 1536–1544
68 Lindvall, O. and Wahlberg, L.U. (2008) Encapsulated cell biodelivery
of GDNF: a novel clinical strategy for neuroprotection and
neuroregeneration in Parkinson’s disease? Exp. Neurol. 209, 82–88
69 Sajadi, A. et al. (2006) Transient striatal delivery of GDNF via
encapsulated cells leads to sustained behavioral improvement in a
bilateral model of Parkinson disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 22, 119–129
70 Kishima, H. et al. (2004) Encapsulated GDNF-producing C2C12 cells
for Parkinson’s disease: a pre-clinical study in chronic MPTP-treated
baboons. Neurobiol. Dis. 16, 428–439
71 Gouhier, C. et al. (2002) Protection of dopaminergic nigrostriatal
afferents by GDNF delivered by microspheres in a rodent model of
Parkinson’s disease. Synapse 44, 124–131
72 Garbayo, E. et al. (2009) Effective GDNF brain delivery using
microspheres – a promising strategy for Parkinson’s disease. J.
Control Release 135, 119–126
73 Huang, R. et al. (2009) Neuroprotection in a 6-hydroxydopaminelesioned Parkinson model using lactoferrin-modified nanoparticles.
J. Gene. Med. 11, 754–763
74 Huang, R. et al. (2010) Gene therapy using lactoferrin-modified
nanoparticles in a rotenone-induced chronic Parkinson model. J.
Neurol. Sci. 290, 123–130
75 Pardridge, W.M. and Boado, R.J. (2009) Pharmacokinetics and safety
in rhesus monkeys of a monoclonal antibody-GDNF fusion protein for
targeted blood–brain barrier delivery. Pharm. Res. 26, 2227–2236
76 Xia, C.F. et al. (2008) Intravenous glial-derived neurotrophic factor
gene therapy of experimental Parkinson’s disease with Trojan horse
liposomes and a tyrosine hydroxylase promoter. J. Gene. Med. 10,
306–315
77 Bradley, L.H. et al. (2010) Dopamine neuron stimulating actions of a
GDNF propeptide. PLoS One 5, e9752
78 Tokugawa, K. et al. (2003) XIB4035, a novel nonpeptidyl small
molecule agonist for GFRalpha-1. Neurochem. Int. 42, 81–86
79 Jang, S.W. et al. (2010) A selective TrkB agonist with potent
neurotrophic activities by 7,8-dihydroxyflavone. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 107, 2687–2692
80 Saavedra, A. et al. (2008) Driving GDNF expression: the green and the
red traffic lights. Prog. Neurobiol. 86, 186–215
81 Weinreb, O. et al. (2007) Induction of neurotrophic factors GDNF and
BDNF associated with the mechanism of neurorescue action of
rasagiline and ladostigil: new insights and implications for
therapy. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1122, 155–168
82 Weinreb, O. et al. (2010) Rasagiline; a novel anti-parkinsonian
monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor with neuroprotective activity. Prog.
Neurobiol. DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2010.06.008
83 Olanow, C.W. et al. (2009) A double-blind, delayed-start trial of
rasagiline in Parkinson’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 361, 1268–
1278
84 Parkinson Study Group (2004) A controlled, randomized, delayedstart study of rasagiline in early Parkinson disease. Arch. Neurol. 61,
561–566
85 Hauser, R.A. et al. (2009) Long-term outcome of early versus delayed
rasagiline treatment in early Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 24,
564–573
86 Ahlskog, J.E. and Uitti, R.J. (2010) Rasagiline, Parkinson
neuroprotection, and delayed-start trials: still no satisfaction?
Neurology 74, 1143–1148

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2
87 Olanow, C.W. and Rascol, O. (2010) The delayed-start study in
Parkinson disease: can’t satisfy everyone. Neurology 74, 1149–1150
88 Visanji, N.P. et al. (2008) PYM50028, a novel, orally active,
nonpeptide neurotrophic factor inducer, prevents and reverses
neuronal damage induced by MPP1 in mesencephalic neurons and
by MPTP in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 22,
2488–2497
89 Bishop, N.A. et al. (2010) Neural mechanisms of ageing and cognitive
decline. Nature 464, 529–535
90 Williams, R. (2010) Slowing the decline. Nature 466, S13–14
91 Krieglstein, K. (2004) Factors promoting survival of mesencephalic
dopaminergic neurons. Cell Tissue Res. 318, 73–80
92 Roussa, E. et al. (2009) TGF-beta in dopamine neuron development,
maintenance and neuroprotection. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 651, 81–90
93 von Bohlen und Halbach, O. and Unsicker, K. (2009) Neurotrophic
support of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 651,
73–80
94 Nagakubo, D. et al. (1997) DJ-1, a novel oncogene which transforms
mouse NIH3T3 cells in cooperation with ras. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 231, 509–513
95 Liou, A.K. et al. (2008) Wild-type LRRK2 but not its mutant
attenuates stress-induced cell death via ERK pathway. Neurobiol.
Dis. 32, 116–124
96 Vasseur, S. et al. (2009) DJ-1/PARK7 is an important mediator of
hypoxia-induced cellular responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106,
1111–1116
97 Aleyasin, H. et al. (2010) DJ-1 protects the nigrostriatal axis from the
neurotoxin MPTP by modulation of the AKT pathway. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 3186–3191
98 Seo, J.H. et al. (2002) Alpha-synuclein regulates neuronal survival via
Bcl-2 family expression and PI3/Akt kinase pathway. FASEB J. 16,
1826–1828
99 Fallon, L. et al. (2006) A regulated interaction with the UIM protein
Eps15 implicates parkin in EGF receptor trafficking and PI(3)K-Akt
signalling. Nat. Cell Biol. 8, 834–842
100 Henn, I.H. et al. (2007) Parkin mediates neuroprotection through
activation of IkappaB kinase/nuclear factor-kappaB signaling. J.
Neurosci. 27, 1868–1878
101 Junn, E. et al. (2005) Interaction of DJ-1 with Daxx inhibits apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase 1 activity and cell death. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. 102, 9691–9696
102 Mo, J.S. et al. (2008) DJ-1 modulates UV-induced oxidative stress
signaling through the suppression of MEKK1 and cell death. Cell
Death Differ. 15, 1030–1041
103 Ren, Y. et al. (2009) Parkin protects dopaminergic neurons against
microtubule-depolymerizing toxins by attenuating microtubuleassociated protein kinase activation. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 4009–4017
104 Fan, J. et al. (2008) DJ-1 decreases Bax expression through repressing
p53 transcriptional activity. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 4022–4030
105 Giaime, E. et al. (2010) Loss of function of DJ-1 triggered by
Parkinson’s disease-associated mutation is due to proteolytic
resistance to caspase-6. Cell Death Differ. 17, 158–169
106 Opsahl, J.A. et al. (2010) Increased interaction between DJ-1 and the
Mi-2/nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase complex during
cellular stress. Proteomics 10, 1494–1504
107 da Costa, C.A. et al. (2009) Transcriptional repression of p53 by parkin
and impairment by mutations associated with autosomal recessive
juvenile Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Cell Biol. 11, 1370–1375
108 Ho, C.C. et al. (2009) The Parkinson disease protein leucine-rich
repeat kinase 2 transduces death signals via Fas-associated
protein with death domain and caspase-8 in a cellular model of
neurodegeneration. J. Neurosci. 29, 1011–1016
109 Iaccarino, C. et al. (2007) Apoptotic mechanisms in mutant LRRK2mediated cell death. Hum. Mol. Genet. 16, 1319–1326
110 Tain, L.S. et al. (2009) Rapamycin activation of 4E-BP prevents
parkinsonian dopaminergic neuron loss. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 1129–
1135
111 Imai, Y. et al. (2008) Phosphorylation of 4E-BP by LRRK2 affects the
maintenance of dopaminergic neurons in Drosophila. EMBO J. 27,
2432–2443
112 Berger, A.K. et al. (2009) Parkin selectively alters the intrinsic
threshold for mitochondrial cytochrome c release. Hum. Mol. Genet.
18, 4317–4328

99

Review
113 Plun-Favreau, H. et al. (2007) The mitochondrial protease HtrA2 is
regulated by Parkinson’s disease-associated kinase PINK1. Nat. Cell
Biol. 9, 1243–1252
114 Gandhi, S. et al. (2009) PINK1-associated Parkinson’s disease is
caused by neuronal vulnerability to calcium-induced cell death.
Mol. Cell 33, 627–638
115 Marongiu, R. et al. (2009) Mutant Pink1 induces mitochondrial
dysfunction in a neuronal cell model of Parkinson’s disease by
disturbing calcium flux. J. Neurochem. 108, 1561–1574

100

Trends in Neurosciences February 2011, Vol. 34, No. 2
116 Piltonen, M. et al. (2009) Heparin-binding determinants of
GDNF reduce its tissue distribution but are beneficial for the
protection of nigral dopaminergic neurons. Exp. Neurol. 219,
499–506
117 Manfredsson, F.P. et al. (2009) Tight Long-term dynamic doxycycline
responsive nigrostriatal GDNF using a single rAAV vector. Mol. Ther.
17, 1857–1867
118 Smith, K. (2010) Treatment frontiers. Nature 466, S15–S18

