Neurologic Diseases (Including Ophthalmic and Auditory Diseases) I
macrophages to the therapeutic effects. Importantly, the degree of
therapeutic improvement was similar in the absence or presence of
GW2580 as demonstrated by similar changes in BAL turbidity, SPD, GM-CSF, and M-CSF (n=4-7/group; P>0.05; all comparisons).
Conclusions: Results demonstrate that GM-CSF but not M-CSF
contributes to the efficacy of PMT therapy that restores surfactant
homeostasis in mice with hPAP.
Funding: ATS, CCHMC, NIH UL1TR000077 (TS); NIH
R01HL085453, R21HL106134, R01HL118342 (BCT)

Neurologic Diseases (Including Ophthalmic and
Auditory Diseases) I
13.
Post-Symptomatic Intrathecal Infusion
of AAV1 Results in Reversal of Storage Lesions
Throughout the Brain in the Cat Model of AlphaMannnosidosis Leading To Clinical Improvement

Sea Young Yoon,1 Jessica H. Bagel,2 Manoj Kumar,3 Patricia A.
O’Donnell,2 Harish Poptani,3 Charles H. Vite,2 John H. Wolfe.1,2,4
1
Research Institute of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia; 2W.F. Goodman Center for Comparative Medical
Genetics, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; 3Departments of Radiology, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia;
4
Departments of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are debilitating neurometabolic
disorders for which long-term effective therapies have not been
developed for most. A critical barrier to progress in the successful
treatment of LSDs is an approach that will allow sustained delivery
of the missing lysosomal enzyme to the brain in a quantity sufficient
to prevent neuropathology. Intrathecal injection of AAVs has been
shown to mediate transduction of neuronal and glial cells in the brain
and spinal cord of large animals, and it has recently been reported
that AAV9 infusion into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of MPS I cats
improves histopathological lesions, but no evidence of improvement
in clinical signs were reported. We tested the efficacy of postsymptomatic intrathecal delivery of AAV1 to the brain via the cisterna
magna in alpha-mannosidosis (AMD) affected cats. Lysosomal
alpha-mannosidase (LAMAN) activity in the CSF was consistently
above untreated AMD cat control values. The lifespan of the treated
cats was significantly extended compared to untreated cats and the
onset of clinical symptoms were delayed and reduced in severity.
We have previously shown that magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) detects a large peak of accumulated oligosaccharides in the
AMD brain of live animals, and it was significantly decreased in the
treated cat brains. Post-mortem histopathology showed resolution
of lysosomal storage lesions in most regions of the brain, including
the cerebral cortex, caudate nucleus, hippocampus, cerebellum and
choroid plexus, and LAMAN enzymatic activity was above levels
of untreated tissues. Our results demonstrate that a single intrathecal
injection of AAV1 expressing feline alpha-mannosidase gene
(fMANB) into the CSF was able to mediate widespread neuronal
transduction of the brain and meaningful clinical improvement. Thus,
intrathecal gene delivery by AAV1 appears to be a viable strategy for
a long lasting treatment for the whole brain in AMD and, based on
the widespread gene distribution, should be applicable to many of the
neurotropic LSDs as well as other neurogenetic disorders.

S6

14.
Next Generation AAV Vectors for Limiting
Systemic Leakage and Improving Safety Following
CNS Administration

Giridhar Murlidharan,1,2 Lavanya Rao,2 Dan Wang,3 Travis
Corriher,2 Kyung Seok-Oh,2 Guangping Gao,3 R. Jude Samulski,2
Alice F. Tarantal,4 Aravind Asokan.1,2
1
Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina-Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; 2Gene Therapy Center, University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; 3Gene Therapy Center,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA;
4
California National Primate Research Center, University of
California-Davis, Davis, CA.

Intracranial or intrathecal administration of certain AAV vectors
for CNS gene transfer is accompanied with systemic leakage into offtarget organs such as the liver and spleen. Both preclinical and clinical
studies have highlighted potential concerns related to high vector
dose-related immunotoxicity and more recently, hepatic genotoxicity
in mouse models. In order to address these potential safety issues
and reduce the effective dose required to achieve efficient transgene
expression in the CNS, we have rationally engineered next generation
AAV vectors that show robust CNS spread and efficient transduction,
while demonstrating minimal leakage into the systemic circulation.
Direct CNS administration or intrathecal infusion of AAV9 results
in highly efficient gene expression in neuronal and glial cellular
populations in neonatal and adult mice in vivo. However, AAV9
vectors are also disseminated into the blood circulation accompanied
by broad vector biodistribution and reporter gene expression in the
heart, liver, spleen and kidney. CNS-to-liver and CNS-to-spleen ratios
of vector genome copy numbers ranging from 0.3 to 1 were observed.
A prototype, engineered AAV strain demonstrated similar potential for
spread and high transduction efficiency in neonatal and adult mice.
However, transgene expression was primarily restricted to neurons
and virtually no leakage into systemic organs was observed regardless
of CNS injection route. Preliminary studies in rhesus macaques
also confirm the ability of the engineered AAV strain to spread and
globally transduce the primate brain. Additional biodistribution
data from rodent and primate models is forthcoming. These studies
provide a roadmap for addressing clinical gene therapy challenges
through continued vector development and confirm that natural AAV
isolates are excellent platforms for building next generation vectors
with robust transduction efficiency and improved safety profiles.

15.
Development of Intrathecal scAAV9 Gene
Therapy for Giant Axonal Neuropathy

Rachel M. Bailey,1 Diane Armao,2 Sahana Nagabhushan Kalburgi,1
Steven J. Gray.1,3
1
Gene Therapy Center, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill; 2Dept. of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill; 3Dept. of Ophthalmology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
Giant axonal neuropathy (GAN) is a rare pediatric neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by progressive sensory and motor neuropathy
that presents as early as 3 years of age and with ultimate mortality
during the second or third decade of life. GAN is caused by
autosomal recessive loss-of-function mutations in the GAN gene
that encodes the gigaxonin protein. Gigaxonin plays a role in the
organization/degradation of intermediate filaments (IFs) and a
pathological hallmark of GAN is large axonal swellings filled with
disorganized aggregates of IFs. While GAN is primarily described
as a peripheral neuropathy, diffuse pathology from disorganized IFs
is found throughout the nervous system and other organ systems.
An NIH-sponsored Phase I study is underway to test the safety of
intrathecal (IT) administration of scAAV9/JeT-GAN to treat the most
Molecular Therapy Volume 23, Supplement 1, May 2015
Copyright © The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Neurologic Diseases (Including Ophthalmic and Auditory Diseases) I
severe aspects of GAN, namely the motor and sensory neuropathy.
Gigaxonin gene transfer is the first proposed therapy for GAN. Our
group developed the vector to be used in the Phase I clinical trial,
which is a self-complementary AAV serotype 9 vector carrying a
codon-optimized human GAN transgene controlled by the minimal
synthetic JeT promoter (scAAV9/JeT-GAN). Preclinical studies show
that scAAV/JeT-GAN can restore the normal arrangement of IFs in
patient fibroblasts within days in cell culture and by 3 weeks in GAN
KO mice. The safety and biodistribution of scAAV9/JeT-GAN was
investigated in mice and non-human primates that received a single
IT overdose of scAAV9/JeT-GAN. No safety concerns were apparent
from these animal studies, with the longest endpoint at 1 year postinjection. To further support the translation of this approach to human
subjects, IT delivery of the scAAV9/JeT-GAN vector in GAN KO
mice showed sustained levels of human gigaxonin expression in
therapeutically-relevant areas for at least 48 weeks without evidence
of toxicity. Furthermore, treated GAN KO mice have improved motor
function and preservation of peripheral nerve ultrastructure. In all, the
results of our preclinical studies attest to the safety of IT scAAV9/
JeT-GAN delivery and the potential benefit to treated patients.
During the review and public discussion of the clinical trial
protocol, the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC)
raised the concern of re-dosing patients with AAV vectors should
the dose used prove to be safe but ineffective. Specifically, the RAC
made the recommendation for researchers to evaluate the effect of
re-administration in preclinical models in advance of this trial or
preceding a subsequent trial. Pilot studies in wild-type mice show
that repeat injection of scAAV9 vectors of the same dose and via
the same IT route results in 70% less vector delivery of the second
transgene to the brain, 70-95% less delivery to regions of the spinal
cord and 55% less delivery to the sciatic nerve. This data suggests
that alternative AAV capsids and/or routes of AAV delivery will need
to be explored to enable effective re-dosing following an initial dose
of scAAV9/JeT-GAN.

Results: In vitro, AAV1-vexosomes led to almost 100% transduction
of inner (IHCs) and outer hair cells (OHCs), while regular AAV1 was
able to transduce only up to 30% of IHCs and OHCs at equivalent
genome copies per cell (Figure 1).

In vivo, vexosomes also outperformed regular AAV. Delivered
by cochleostomy, AAV1-vexosomes transduced 63.7±6.5% and
30.0±9.8% of IHCs and OHCs, respectively, whereas AAV1
transduced only 35.8±0.7% and 16.7±1.9% (mean fraction of
transduced cells from two experiments with 10 animals in each group).
Delivered by RWM, AAV1-vexosomes transduced 88.0±2.2% and
25.2±10% of IHCs and OHCs, whereas AAV1 transduced 75.0±4.4%
and 15.6±0.4% (two experiments)(Figure 2).

16.
Exosome-Associated AAV as a Novel
Platform for Gene Therapy of Hearing Loss

Bence Gyorgy,1,2 Cyrille Sage,1 Deborah Scheffer,1 Artur A.
Indzhykulian,1 Dakai Mu,2 Xandra O. Breakefield,2 Casey A.
Maguire,2 David P. Corey.1
1
Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical
Institue, Boston, MA; 2Neurology, MGH, Charlestown, MA.
Introduction: In recent gene therapy trials, adeno-associated virus
(AAV) vectors for diseases such as blindness and hemophilia were
found to be safe and effective. Gene therapy for hearing and balance
disorders is not as advanced, because gene delivery into the cochlea
(particularly to sensory hair cells) is generally inefficient. Here we
show that exosome-associated AAV vectors (vexosomes) are highly
effective carriers of transgenes to hair cells.
Methods: Vexosomes from media of AAV-producing cells
(293T) were harvested by ultracentrifugation. For in vitro cochlear
transductions, we explanted organs of Corti from P1 CD1 mice.
Conventional AAV1 vectors or AAV1 vexosomes, encoding for
GFP, were added to the culture medium to determine the extent of
transgene delivery and expression. For in vivo studies, we injected
vectors at P1 into the scala media through cochleostomy or into the
scala tympani through the round window membrane (RWM). To
study whether vexosomes can rescue a disease phenotype in vitro,
we explanted Corti organs from Tmhs (Lhfpl5) knock-out mice,
which lack mechanotransduction (and hearing and balance) beyond
P5. Cultures were transduced with vexosomes encoding TMHS
(tetraspan membrane protein of hair cell stereocilia) and restoration
of function was assessed by FM1-43 dye uptake, which is trapped
inside functional hair cells.
Molecular Therapy Volume 23, Supplement 1, May 2015
Copyright © The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Importantly, AAV1-vexosomes encoding TMHS were able to
restore FM1-43 accumulation in TMHS KO hair cells in vitro,
apparently rescuing mechanotransduction.
Conclusion: Exosome-associated AAV is a powerful gene delivery
system to the mammalian cochlea in vitro and in vivo, Therefore they
may be utilized to study hair cell physiology in vitro, and—in the
future—for in vivo gene therapy.

17.
Gene Therapy Strategies to Treat Fragile X
Syndrome

Jason Arsenault,1 Shervin Gholizadeh,1 Enea Koxhioni,1 Sebok K.
Halder,1 David R. Hampson.1
1
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a severe debilitating neurodevelopmental disorder of the autism spectrum that results from
an aberrant trinucleotide repeat extension in the 5’ region of the
FMR1 gene. This extension pathologically reduces or eliminates the
expression of the fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). FMRP
is known to be a scrupulous translational modulator at the synapse
and is also known to stabilize and traffic mRNAs important for proper
neurological functions. We utilized C57/BL6 mice with a knock-out
of the Fmr1 gene (FMRP-KO) in this study because this mouse model
reproduces many of the behavioral phenotypes seen in human Fragile
X patients. We used adeno-associated viral vectors (AAV) serotype
S7

