METHOD

Potent microRNA suppression by RNA Pol II-transcribed
‘Tough Decoy’ inhibitors
RASMUS O. BAK, ANNE KRUSE HOLLENSEN, MARIA NASCIMENTO PRIMO, CAMILLA DARUM SØRENSEN,
and JACOB GIEHM MIKKELSEN1
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark

ABSTRACT
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators of gene expression and modulators of diverse biological pathways. Analyses of miRNA
function as well as therapeutic managing of miRNAs rely on cellular administration of miRNA inhibitors which may be achieved by
the use of viral vehicles. This study explores the miRNA-suppressive capacity of inhibitors expressed intracellularly from lentivirusderived gene vectors. Superior activity of two decoy-type inhibitors, a “Bulged Sponge” with eight miRNA recognition sites and a
hairpin-shaped “Tough Decoy” containing two miRNA recognition sites, is demonstrated in a side-by-side comparison of seven
types of miRNA inhibitors transcribed as short RNAs from an RNA Pol III promoter. We find that lentiviral vectors expressing
Tough Decoy inhibitors are less vulnerable than Bulged Sponge-encoding vectors to targeting by the cognate miRNA and less
prone, therefore, to reductions in transfer efficiency. Importantly, it is demonstrated that Tough Decoy inhibitors retain their
miRNA suppression capacity in the context of longer RNA transcripts expressed from an RNA Pol II promoter. Such RNA Pol
II-transcribed Tough Decoy inhibitors are new tools in managing of miRNAs and may have potential for temporal and spatial
regulation of miRNA activity as well as for therapeutic targeting of miRNAs that are aberrantly expressed in human disease.
Keywords: miRNA inhibition; Tough Decoy; TuD; lentiviral vectors

INTRODUCTION
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenously encoded small RNA
species that regulate gene expression by mediating mRNA
degradation and translational repression. As part of the
large multicomponent RNA-induced silencing complex
(RISC), miRNAs target mRNAs through imperfect or perfect
base-pairing with recognition sites located mainly in the
3′ untranslated region (UTR). Imperfect base-pairing promotes enhanced mRNA degradation or translational suppression, whereas perfect or near-perfect base-pairing promotes
mRNA cleavage. mRNA cleavage occurs at a single phosphodiester bond corresponding to nucleotides 10–11 of the paired
miRNA (Elbashir et al. 2001), and base-pairing at the central
part of the miRNA is imperative for RISC-mediated cleavage
to occur, as it provides the required geometry at the active site
to make the complex catalytically active (Ameres et al. 2007).
To date, more than 2000 different mature miRNAs in humans
have been identified (miRBase, August 2012, release 19.0).
The expanding number of miRNAs has revealed an extensive
and intricate level of gene regulation in which a single gene can
be under the regulation of several different miRNAs and, vice
1

Corresponding author
E-mail giehm@hum-gen.au.dk
Article published online ahead of print. Article and publication date are at
http://www.rnajournal.org/cgi/doi/10.1261/rna.034850.112.

280

versa, that a single miRNA can potentially regulate hundreds
of genes. Aberrant miRNA activity has been associated with a
wide range of pathological conditions, demonstrating the
functional significance of miRNAs in disease development
and their potential use as diagnostic biomarkers or therapeutic targets (McDermott et al. 2011).
With the intensifying research in miRNA target identification and miRNA gain- and loss-of-function phenotypes,
molecular tools have been developed for overexpression
and inhibition of miRNA function. MicroRNA overexpression is achieved by mimicking endogenous miRNA expression. Hence, the miRNA-encoding genomic region can be
cloned and expressed from a vector of choice, or alternatively,
chemically synthesized miRNA precursor molecules can
be delivered by cellular transfection (Zeng et al. 2002, 2005;
Dickins et al. 2005; Chang et al. 2006; Guimaraes-Sternberg
et al. 2006). Methods of miRNA inhibition have primarily relied on transfection of synthetic antisense molecules of different chemistries that are fully complementary to the mature
miRNA and thus act as decoys to stoichiometrically sequester
miRNAs from their natural targets (Hutvágner et al. 2004;
Davis et al. 2006). Less studied synthetic miRNA inhibition
molecules include synthetic siRNAs, small molecule inhibitors, and target-protecting masks (Jing et al. 2005; Lee et al.
2005; Choi et al. 2007; Vasudevan et al. 2007; Gumireddy
et al. 2008; Medina and Slack 2009; Young et al. 2010;

RNA (2013), 19:280–293. Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. Copyright © 2013 RNA Society.

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

Zhang et al. 2010). Although chemically synthesized miRNA
inhibitors may effectively target miRNAs, disadvantages of
this approach include the requirement for repeated administration to achieve persistent miRNA inhibition, high production costs, and low transfection efficiency in some tissues and
cell types.
DNA-encoded miRNA inhibitors, transferred by either
nonviral or viral vector technologies, are cost-effective and
can be delivered efficiently to specific cells or tissues. Depending on the vector type and the proliferation status of
the target cells, DNA-encoded inhibitors may be continuously expressed, facilitating a prolonged miRNA-suppressive
response. Expression from inducible and tissue-specific
promoters may allow tailored inhibitor expression, and coexpression of genetic reporters may be utilized to track inhibitor expression in cells or live animals (Medina and Slack
2009). A series of designs has been used for vector-encoded
miRNA inhibitors. Initial studies described the use of tandemly arranged miRNA target sequences embedded in the
3′ UTR of a reporter gene which was delivered by the use
of an adenoviral vector (Care et al. 2007). The efficiency of
this type of miRNA inhibition transcript, later termed a
miRNA “Sponge” (Ebert et al. 2007), was further improved
by introducing a bulge in the central part of the target sites
to prevent endonucleolytic target cleavage, prolonging the
interaction with the miRNA (Ebert et al. 2007). Additionally,
Ebert et al. showed functionality of such “Bulged Sponge”
inhibitors expressed as short transcripts from an RNA
Polymerase III (Pol III) promoter. A similar approach was
used to express short transcripts containing only a single
or two miRNA target sites from an RNA Pol III promoter
(Scherr et al. 2007; Haraguchi et al. 2009). Scherr et al. demonstrated miRNA suppression by an “antagomiR” inhibitor
containing a single perfect miRNA target site (Scherr et al.
2007), whereas Haraguchi et al., by screening of several structural designs, showed effective miRNA inhibition by a
“Tough Decoy” inhibitor consisting of a hairpin containing
a large, internal bulge exposing two miRNA target sites with
imperfect base-pairing with the miRNA (Haraguchi et al.
2009), a design that has later been proven to be effective
in synthetic inhibition molecules (Haraguchi et al. 2012).
Both the Tough Decoy and the Bulged Sponge inhibitors
have been shown to effectively inhibit whole families of
miRNAs through base-pairing to the seed sequence, but inhibition efficiency is assumed to be dependent on features also
governing natural miRNA target recognition and may, therefore, rely on the overall degree of complementarity (Ebert
et al. 2007; Haraguchi et al. 2009). As opposed to such decoy
approaches, Wang et al. employed the RNAi machinery to
trigger the degradation of miRNAs by producing RNA Pol
III-driven small hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) directed toward
the sequence of the mature miRNA (Wang et al. 2011).
Lentiviral vectors derived from human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) are widely used molecular tools for gene
transfer. The inherent capacity of these vectors to integrate

into target cell genomic DNA, in a reaction catalyzed by the
viral integrase enzyme, gives rise to persistent transgene expression in both dividing and nondividing cells (Naldini
et al. 1996). Moreover, pseudotyping with the surface glycoprotein from vesicular stomatitis virus enables efficient transduction of a wide range of cell types. Together, such properties
render lentiviral vectors an attractive platform for delivery of
miRNA inhibitor expression cassettes with a variety of potential applications in in vivo and in vitro settings. Until now, lentiviral vectors expressing antagomiRs, Tough Decoys, and
Bulged Sponges have been used for efficient miRNA inhibition (Scherr et al. 2007; Gentner et al. 2009; Haraguchi et al.
2009; Mullokandov et al. 2012), but it remains unclear how
different miRNA inhibitors compare to each other for functional suppression of miRNAs. Moreover, complicating issues
related to recombination and targeting by endogenous
miRNAs due to the presence of single or multiple miRNAcomplementary sequences in the lentiviral RNA genome
have not been previously addressed.
In this study, we perform a side-by-side comparison of
seven types of DNA-encoded miRNA inhibitors expressed
from transfected plasmid DNA and transduced lentiviral vectors. The highest levels of miRNA-suppressive activity are
monitored with Bulged Sponge and Tough Decoy inhibitors.
These two types of inhibitors generally show comparable
miRNA targeting capacities despite the presence of only
two miRNA target sites in the Tough Decoy, as opposed to
eight in the Bulged Sponge. Notably, however, we demonstrate that lentiviral vectors encoding Tough Decoy RNAs
are significantly less vulnerable to targeting by endogenous
miRNAs and, therefore, less prone to reductions in transductional titers than Bulged Sponge-encoding vectors. Importantly, we report that the miRNA inhibition capacities of
Tough Decoy inhibitors are maintained and, in some cases,
further improved by fusing the Tough Decoy with RNA transcripts produced from a RNA Pol II promoter. Altogether,
our findings support the use of RNA Pol II transcripts as carriers of Tough Decoy inhibitors in future applications of
DNA-encoded inhibitors for miRNA suppression.
RESULTS
Side-by-side comparison of vector-encoded miRNA
inhibitors demonstrates superior activity of Tough
Decoy inhibitors
To identify potent DNA-encoded miRNA inhibitors, we set
out to directly compare the potency of seven different inhibitor designs that have recently been employed as inhibitors
of miRNAs. The panel of inhibitors included (1) a short
antagomiR RNA transcript with perfect miRNA complementarity (Scherr et al. 2007), (2) an antagomiR stabilized by two
terminal hairpins (Vermeulen et al. 2007), (3) a Tough Decoy
inhibitor composed of an RNA hairpin with two bulged
miRNA binding sites exposed in the central part of the stem
www.rnajournal.org

281

Bak et al.

(Haraguchi et al. 2009), (4) a miRNAdirected shRNA (Wang et al. 2011),
(5) a Sponge RNA transcript with eight
miRNA binding sites, each with perfect
complementarity to the miRNAs (Ebert
et al. 2007; Gentner et al. 2009), (6) a
Bulged Sponge RNA with central bulges
in the eight target sites (Ebert et al. 2007;
Gentner et al. 2009), and (7) a “mask”
RNA that binds to and protects the
mRNA from recognition by the miRNA
(Fig. 1A; Choi et al. 2007). To directly
compare the miRNA inhibition potencies, we constructed two sets of lentiviral
vectors (see Fig. 1B for schematic representation of the vector design) expressing inhibitors directed against miR-16
and miR-203, respectively. miR-16 is
highly expressed in virus-producing
HEK-293T cells, whereas endogenous
expression of miR-203 is only minuscule in HEK-293T cells, as determined
by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR)
(Fig. 1C), allowing us to study the effects
of endogenous miRNA expression on
production and transfer of inhibitorencoding lentiviral vectors. miRNA
inhibitors were expressed from the human H1 RNA Polymerase III promoter
which facilitates high expression of welldefined short RNA transcripts that are
neither capped nor polyadenylated.
FIGURE 1. Overview of miRNA inhibition strategies. (A) Schematic representations of the seven
miRNA inhibition potencies were evalmiRNA inhibitors compared in the current study. (i) AntagomiR with a single perfect miRNA target site (Scherr et al. 2007); (ii) a single perfect miRNA target site stabilized with terminal hairpin
uated using a dual-luciferase assay in
structures (Vermeulen et al. 2007); (iii) a Tough Decoy with two bulged miRNA target sites
which one of the reporter genes encod(Haraguchi et al. 2009); (iv) an shRNA targeting the mature miRNA (only the guide strand of
ing Renilla luciferase (RLuc) was fused
the processed shRNA is depicted) (Wang et al. 2011); (v) a miRNA sponge with eight consecutive
to a perfect miRNA target site, making
miRNA perfect target sites (Ebert et al. 2007; Gentner et al. 2009); (vi) a sponge with eight consecutive bulged miRNA target sites (Ebert et al. 2007; Gentner et al. 2009); (vii) a miRNA mask that
it responsive to the activity of the specifbinds and protects the miRNA target sites on the mRNA (Choi et al. 2007). (B) Schematic repreic miRNA. For plasmid delivery of
sentation of the lentiviral plasmid used for expressing miRNA inhibitors from the H1 RNA Pol III
the inhibitor-encoding expression caspromoter (shown in white). (CMV) Cytomegalovirus promoter, (Ψ) viral RNA packaging signal,
(RRE) rev response element, (cPPT) central polypurine tract, (PGK) phosphoglycerate kinase prosettes, lentiviral vector plasmid DNA exmoter, (Puror) puromycin resistance gene (puromycin N-acetyl-transferase [PAC]), (WPRE)
pressing each of the miRNA inhibitors
woodchuck hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element. (C ) miRNA levels in HEKwas separately cotransfected into HEK293T, HEK-293, and HeLa cells. qPCR threshold cycles (Ct) were determined for miR-16 and
293 cells with plasmid DNA expressing
miR-203 in HEK-293T, HEK-293, and HeLa cells. Additionally, Ct values for the U48 small nuclear RNA (RNU48) were determined as a reference small RNA. Data are depicted as mean + SEM.
the RLuc reporter. For lentiviral delivery, we transduced HEK-293 cells with
lentiviral vectors at a total dose of 25
RLuc reporter plasmid, and RLuc activities were normalized
ng p24 capsid protein corresponding to an estimated multito firefly luciferase (FLuc) activities to normalize for potential
plicity of infection (MOI) of ∼80. One day after transduction,
variations in transfection efficiencies. RLuc:FLuc ratios were
cells were transfected with the RLuc reporter plasmid. As
normalized to the ratio obtained with a control vector not exHEK-293 cells express very low levels of miR-203, a
pressing any type of inhibitor (Vehicle).
miR203-encoding plasmid, pT2/CMV-pri-miR-203.SV40For plasmid transfections, highly variable miRNA supneo, was included in the transfection mix in all assays evalupression capacities were measured for the seven types of inating the capacity of suppressing miR-203. For all assays, lucifhibitors (Fig. 2A,B). Notably, the mutual hierarchy among
erase activities were measured 2 d after transfection of the
282

RNA, Vol. 19, No. 2

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

A

B

11

21

****

12
****

*

5
4
3
2
1

Normalized RLuc:FLuc rao

Normalized RLuc:FLuc rao

13

2
1
0

**
*

Normalized RLuc:FLuc rao

Normalized RLuc:FLuc rao

*

10

3

5

***

4
3
2
1

21

11

4

****
****

D

12

9

19

0

0

C

20

20
**

19
3

**
*

2
1
0

FIGURE 2. Tough Decoy inhibitors perform best among seven miRNA inhibition strategies
when delivered by plasmid transfection or lentiviral transduction. A dual-luciferase assay was
used to screen the potency of seven vector-encoded miRNA inhibitors targeting miR-16 (A,C)
or miR-203 (B,D). miRNA inhibitor expression cassettes were delivered either by plasmid transfection (A,B) or by lentiviral transduction (C,D). A miR203-encoding plasmid was included in all
assays evaluating miR-203 inhibitors. Data are depicted as mean + SEM. (∗ ) P < 0.05, (∗∗ ) P <
0.01, (∗∗∗ ) P < 0.001, (∗∗∗∗ ) P < 0.0001.

the inhibitors was comparable for the two miRNAs. Whereas
neither the shRNA nor the mask was functional, the
antagomiR and stabilized antagomiR displayed a significant,
but only modest, inhibitory effect on the two miRNAs.
Higher levels of miRNA inhibition were measured for both
sponges, with the Bulged Sponge as the most efficient inhibitor of the two. Consistently for the two targeted miRNAs,
the Tough Decoy inhibitor was the most potent inhibitor of
miRNA activity, resulting in levels of RLuc expression that
were increased 4.3-fold and 3.4-fold relative to the negative
control for miR-16 (P = 1.6 × 10−7) and miR-203 (P =
1.1 × 10−7), respectively. To further validate this mutual ranking of the three most potent inhibitors, we performed a titration assay in which increasing dosages of the three inhibitorencoding plasmids were transfected into HEK-293 cells and
observed a clear dose-response correlation for all inhibitors
(data not shown). At all concentrations of inhibitor-encoding
plasmid, Tough Decoy inhibitors performed better than both

Sponges, and Bulged Sponges performed marginally better than Sponges
with perfect miRNA complementarity
(data not shown). When the inhibitors
were expressed from transduced lentiviral vectors, we observed that only vectors encoding Tough Decoy and
Bulged Sponge inhibitors were able to
suppress the activity of the target
miRNAs with statistical significance relative to the negative control (Fig. 2C,D).
Notably, we found for both miR-16 and
miR-203 that lentiviral vectors encoding Tough Decoy inhibitors resulted in
levels of RLuc expression that were significantly higher than those obtained
by lentiviral transfer of Bulged Sponge
inhibitors (P = 0.018 and P = 0.033 for
miR-16 and miR-203, respectively).
Together, these experiments demonstrate that, among seven different types
of miRNA inhibitors, the most potent
interference of miRNA activity was obtained by Tough Decoy inhibitors expressed from both plasmid DNA and
lentiviral vectors.
Variable transductional titers of
inhibitor-encoding lentiviral vectors

The transduction efficiency of lentiviral
vectors encoding miRNA inhibitors is
potentially affected by the presence of
an inhibitor cassette which may disturb
the performance of the vector in both
producer and recipient cells. Not only
could complex secondary structures
of the inhibitor affect transcription, reverse transcription,
and packaging of the viral genome, but lentiviral vector
RNA is also potentially subjected to degradation due to recognition of the inhibitor sequence by the complementary
miRNA. Also, it cannot be excluded that miRNA inhibition
may affect the virus-producing cells or that the presence of
the inhibitor expression cassette in the 3′ LTR may have a
negative impact on virus production since inserts within
the 3′ LTR reduce viral titers proportionally to the length
of the insert (Urbinati et al. 2009).
To address the impact of the different inhibitors on vector
transfer, we first determined transductional titers as measured by the number of puromycin-resistant colony-forming
units obtained in vector-transduced HeLa cells (Fig. 3A).
Marked variations in titers, ranging from 2 × 107 CFU/mL
for LV/Mask-16 to 2 × 104 CFU/mL for LV/Sponge-16,
were observed among the miR-16 inhibitor-encoding lentiviral vectors, whereas titers for all miR-203-inhibiting vectors
www.rnajournal.org

283

Bak et al.

titer (threefold; P = 0.13) was evident
for the Bulged Sponge-encoding vector
***
compared to the vector expressing the
10
**
Tough Decoy inhibitor. Furthermore,
we observed that the yield of lentiviral
10
10
vectors expressing miR-16-directed
10
inhibitors varied in a similar fashion, although to a lesser extent, as determined
10
by measuring the viral p24 capsid protein (data not shown). On the contrary,
10
10
the yield of all miR203-targeting vectors
was not affected by the inhibitor design,
indicating that the overall production
of viral particles, evident for Spongeencoding vectors in particular, was
negatively affected in an endogenous
FIGURE 3. Transfer of Bulged Sponge-encoding lentiviral vectors are markedly affected by enmiRNA-dependent fashion. Together,
dogenous miRNAs targeting the vector. (A) Reduced transductional titer of Sponge-encoding
vectors as determined by the number of puromycin-resistant colony-forming units per mL
our findings suggest that lentiviral vec(CFU/mL). (B) Reduced integration capacity of Bulged Sponge-encoding lentiviral vectors as detors carrying miRNA inhibitor cassettes
termined by the number of lentiviral integrations quantified by qPCR. Data are depicted as mean
∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗∗
are vulnerable to regulation by endoge) P < 0.0001.
+ SEM. ( ) P < 0.05, ( ) P < 0.01, ( ) P < 0.001, (
nous miRNAs but also demonstrate
that Tough Decoy-encoding vectors,
were high and did not vary significantly (titers ranging from
relative to Sponge inhibitors, are less prone to such regulation
1 × 107 to 4 × 107 CFU/mL). Together with the fact that miRdespite their substantial miRNA-suppressive potential.
16 was highly expressed and miR-203 was only vaguely expressed in virus producer and recipient cells (HEK-293T
Integrity of the inhibitor-encoding cassettes during
and HeLa cells, respectively) (Fig. 1C), these data demonlentiviral transfer
strated that vector transduction for some of the inhibitors
was strongly influenced by endogenous miRNAs. Notably,
The ability of the reverse transcriptase to switch between
we found that the titers among the two most potent inhibithe two lentiviral RNA templates during reverse transcriptor-encoding vectors, LV/Tough Decoy-16 and LV/Bulged
tion makes direct repeat sequences prone to rearrangement
Sponge-16, varied 100-fold. Such substantial titer variations
by either duplication or deletion (Gilboa et al. 1979; An
between miR16-targeting vectors were potentially caused by
and Telesnitsky 2001; ter Brake et al. 2008; McIntyre et al.
the design of the lentiviral vector (Fig. 1B) in which the pres2009). To evaluate the integrity of the inhibitor cassette
ence of only a single polyadenylation signal in the 3′ LTR renafter lentiviral integration, we transduced cells at a very low
dered the puromycin N-acetyl-transferase (PAC) mRNA
MOI to obtain clones with single lentiviral integrations and
transcript susceptible to miRNA-mediated regulation due
performed PCR-based analyses of the inhibitor cassette on geto the miRNA target sites in the inhibitor. Hence, these
nomic DNA from pooled and single clones. For PCRs perdata suggest that vectors encoding a classical Sponge configformed on pooled clones, only Sponge and Bulged Sponge
uration were highly vulnerable to endogenous miRNAs,
inhibitors gave rise to multiple bands, suggesting that delewhereas Tough Decoy-containing transcripts were less sensitions and duplications had occurred during lentiviral transfer
tive to targeting by their complementary miRNA.
of the Sponges (data not shown). We then sequenced 15 indiTo examine the transductional titer by a method that did
vidual clones carrying the Bulged Sponge inhibitor and found
not depend on PAC expression, we next determined the titer
a single clone harboring a vector in which one of the eight
for the vectors encoding the Bulged Sponges and Tough
miRNA target sites was lost, whereas one other clone had
Decoys by quantifying by qPCR the number of lentiviral
gained an additional miRNA target site (data not shown).
DNA copies integrated in the genome of transduced HeLa
These findings demonstrated that the integrity of Sponge-encells (Fig. 3B). By this method, which yields an absolute
coding cassettes was reduced relative to all other vectors, most
measurement of the production and transfer efficiency of
probably due to rearrangements during reverse transcription.
lentiviral vectors, we observed that the titer of LV/Bulged
Sponge-16 was reduced sevenfold compared to LV/Tough
miRNA inhibition by RNA Pol II-transcribed Tough
Decoy-16 (P = 0.0059), indicating that vector RNA was
Decoy inhibitors
targeted by endogenous miR-16 expressed in the virus-producing cells. In contrast, for vectors encoding miR-203 inTough Decoy inhibitors are deliberately designed to be exhibitors, a small but not statistically significant reduction in
pressed from RNA Pol III promoters as short transcripts
108

***

Transduconal ter
(CFU/mL)

7

6

5

4

3

284

RNA, Vol. 19, No. 2

B

Transduconal ter
(integrang viral genomes/mL)

A

108

7

6

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

that have structural features resembling pre-miRNAs. This
will allow active nuclear export through Exportin-5 recognition of the small terminal 3′ overhang and the dsRNA stem
(Lund et al. 2004; Haraguchi et al. 2009; Okada et al.
2009). However, RNA Pol III promoters lack temporal and
spatial control and do not allow controlled expression of
miRNA inhibitors. In contrast, numerous RNA Pol II promoters allow tissue-specific expression, and both inducible
and repressible RNA Pol II promoters exist. Bulged Sponge
inhibitors expressed as RNA Pol II transcripts in fusion
with eGFP mRNA have been found to suppress miRNA activity to a similar extent as short, RNA Pol III-driven Bulged
Sponge inhibitors (Ebert et al. 2007). It has not been explored
whether the highly structured Tough Decoy inhibitors retain
their miRNA-suppressive potential when embedded in a long
RNA Pol II transcript. Such an approach would benefit from
the higher degree of flexibility conferred by the RNA Pol II
promoters and, in addition, mono-cistronic expression of a
reporter mRNA and a miRNA inhibitor would allow easy
tracking of inhibitor expression while minimizing vector
composition.
To investigate if fusion with an RNA Pol II transcript is a
feasible approach also for Tough Decoy inhibitors, we fused
Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors directed toward
five miRNAs, miR-16, miR-203, miR-143, miR-145, and
miR-195, to the 3′ UTR of the eGFP gene as shown in Figure
4A. The fusion RNA variants (depicted in Fig. 4B) were expressed from a phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) promoter in
the context of a lentiviral vector plasmid. In dual-luciferase
assays based on plasmid transfection, we observed for miR16, miR-203, miR-145, and miR-195 an increased level of

miRNA inhibition by the PGK-driven fusion RNA transcripts containing Tough Decoys and Bulged Sponges relative
to the inhibitors expressed from the H1 promoter (Fig. 4C,D,
F,G). Notably, the miRNA suppression activity of the miR16directed Tough Decoy fused to eGFP was almost doubled
relative to the H1-driven Tough Decoy transcripts (P =
9.0 × 10−6) and was significantly higher than the activity of
the eGFP-fused Bulged Sponge-16 (P = 1.9 × 10−5). The efficiency of eGFP-fused Tough Decoys directed against miR203, miR-145, and miR-195 was comparable to the efficiency
of their Bulged Sponge counterparts (P = 0.19, P = 0.40, and
P = 0.91, respectively). Only for miR143-directed inhibitors
did we measure decreased efficiencies of the eGFP-fused inhibitors compared to the H1-transcribed inhibitors (Fig. 4E).
For this particular miRNA, we also observed higher potency
of the Bulged Sponge compared to the Tough Decoy. To further strengthen the concept of expressing Tough Decoy inhibitors as part of longer RNA Pol II transcripts, we
generated three additional RNA Pol II and RNA Pol III vector
pairs expressing Tough Decoy inhibitors targeting miR-146a,
miR-221, and miR-222. For all three miRNAs, equal inhibition potencies were seen for RNA Pol II- and RNA Pol IIIdriven Tough Decoys (data not shown).
In summary, among the eight miRNAs that we have targeted with Tough Decoy inhibitors, four miRNAs (miR-16,
miR-145, miR-195, and miR-203) were more potently suppressed by inhibitors embedded in the eGFP transcript,
whereas only miR-143 was most efficiently targeted by the
H1-driven Tough Decoy transcript. We conclude that the
miRNA inhibition potential of Tough Decoy inhibitors is
maintained in the context of RNA Pol II transcripts.

FIGURE 4. Tough Decoy inhibitors retain their functionality when fused to an RNA Pol II eGFP transcript. (A) Schematic overview of the lentiviral
vector plasmid used for expression of miRNA inhibitors in fusion with eGFP. (B) Schematic representations of the expressed fusion transcripts containing the Bulged Sponge and Tough Decoy inhibitors, respectively. (C–G) Dual-luciferase assays comparing Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors transcribed from RNA Pol II and Pol III promoters targeting miR-16 (C), miR-203 (D), miR-143 (E), miR-145 (F), and miR-195 (G). Data
are depicted as mean + SEM. (∗ ) P < 0.05, (∗∗ ) P < 0.01, (∗∗∗ ) P < 0.001, (∗∗∗∗ ) P < 0.0001.

www.rnajournal.org

285

Bak et al.

miRNA inhibition by lentivirally delivered RNA Pol IItranscribed Tough Decoy inhibitors
To explore the efficacy of lentivirally delivered RNA Pol IIdriven inhibitors, we produced lentiviral vectors encoding
Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors targeting miR16 and miR-203 and performed the dual-luciferase assay on
HEK-293 cells transduced with equal amounts of vector particles (25 ng p24 capsid protein per well corresponding to an
estimated multiplicity of infection [MOI] of ∼80). Once
again, Tough Decoy-16 suppressed the miRNA with higher
potency than the Bulged Sponge (Fig. 5A), whereas the effiB

C
20

13

19

12
11

***

3
2
1

18
17
3
2
1

***

E

1.25

**

0.00

Relave miR-203 levels

Relave miR-16 levels

0.75

0.25

****

F

**

1.25

*

**

****

1.00

0.50

107

1.00
0.75
**

0.50
0.25
0.00

Relave TNFα mRNA levels

1.25

**

106

0

0

D

108
Transductional titer
(Integrating viral genomes/mL)

14
Normalized RLuc:FLuc ratio

Normalized RLuc:FLuc ratio

A

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

FIGURE 5. Lentiviral vectors encoding RNA Pol II-transcribed Tough
Decoys are functional and not prone to reductions in transductional titers. (A,B) Dual-luciferase assays evaluating the potency of lentivirally
delivered RNA Pol II-transcribed Tough Decoys and Bulged Sponge inhibitors targeting miR-16 (A) or miR-203 (B). (C) Transductional titers
of lentiviral vectors encoding RNA Pol II-transcribed miR16- and
miR203-directed Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors as determined by the number of lentiviral integrations quantified by qPCR. (D,
E) Endogenous miRNA levels were quantified by qPCR following lentiviral delivery of RNA Pol II-driven Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors. For miR-16 inhibition, MCF-7 cells were transduced (D), and
for miR-203 inhibition, HaCaT cells were transduced (E). (F) TNFα
mRNA levels were quantified by qPCR in HaCaT cells transduced
with lentiviral vectors encoding RNA Pol II-driven miR-203 inhibitors.
Data are depicted as mean + SEM. (∗ ) P < 0.05, (∗∗ ) P < 0.01, (∗∗∗ ) P <
0.001, (∗∗∗∗ ) P < 0.0001.

286

RNA, Vol. 19, No. 2

ciencies of the two inhibitors were equal in the case of miR203 (Fig. 5B), resembling the data obtained when the inhibitors were delivered by plasmid transfection. Determination of
lentiviral vector titers based on quantification of integrating
viral vectors demonstrated that the transductional titer for
the vector encoding eGFP-Bulged Sponge-16 was reduced
five times relative to the corresponding vector expressing
the Tough Decoy-16 fusion transcript (P = 0.0062) (Fig.
5C). On the contrary, vectors encoding miR203-targeting
inhibitors did not differ in transductional titers (P = 0.39).
Again, we observed that the yield of the eGFP-Bulged
Sponge-16-expressing vector, as measured by p24 capsid
ELISA, was slightly reduced relative to the vector encoding
the eGFP-Tough Decoy-16 transcript (data not shown).
We next investigated if miRNA inhibition could be monitored by miRNA levels as detected by qPCR. In cells transduced with lentiviral vectors encoding eGFP-Tough Decoy
and eGFP-Bulged Sponge inhibitor transcripts targeting
miR-16 and miR-203, we measured a marked reduction in
the level of miRNA that was detectable by qPCR (Fig. 5D,E).
For miR-16, the Tough Decoy gave rise to the lowest levels
of detectable miR-16, whereas the opposite was observed
for miR-203 for which the Bulged Sponge gave rise to the
lowest levels of detectable miR-203.
We have previously established that mRNA encoding the
proinflammatory cytokine TNFα is a target of miR-203 in
keratinocytes (Primo et al. 2012). To confirm a biological effect of the two RNA Pol II-driven inhibitors, we transduced a
human keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT) with lentiviral vectors
encoding miR203-directed Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge
inhibitors. By targeting miR-203, which is expressed at low
levels in the lentiviral vector producer cells, similar transfer
efficiencies of the two vectors could be achieved (Fig. 5C).
As shown in Figure 5F, both types of RNA Pol II-expressed
inhibitors caused derepression of the TNFα mRNA level,
leading to levels of TNFα mRNA that were significantly higher than the levels obtained with a lentiviral control vector that
did not express an inhibitor (P = 0.014 and P = 0.0048 for
LV/eGFP-Tough Decoy-203 and LV/eGFP-Bulged Sponge203, respectively). Notably, the increase in the level of
TNFα mRNA was similar for the two inhibitors.
In summary, these findings validate the capacity of lentivirus-delivered RNA Pol II-driven Tough Decoy inhibitors in
the management of miRNAs. The effect of miRNA inhibition
is evident as decreased miRNA levels and increased levels of a
target mRNA as detected by qPCR. Yet, with only two
miRNA target sites, vectors encoding Tough Decoy inhibitors seem less prone to miRNA targeting than vectors carrying a Bulged Sponge expression cassette.
Analysis of miRNA targeting of the inhibitor-encoding
transcript
To further analyze targeting of the RNA Pol II-transcribed
eGFP-inhibitor fusion RNAs by their complementary

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

A

B
111 ng

37 ng

C
mRNA

12.3 ng

120

120

60
40

***

1.00
**

0.75
0.50

20

0.25

0

0.00

**

Relave eGFP expression (%)

80

**

Relave eGFP levels

100

HEK-293T

Protein

1.25
*

Relave eGFP expression (%)

lower for LV/eGFP-Bulged Sponge-16 relative to LV/eGFPTough Decoy-16 (P = 0.0089 and P = 0.0068 for mRNA
and protein levels, respectively), lending support to the notion that miRNA recognition of the Bulged Sponge induced
a higher level of mRNA degradation, resulting in reduced
eGFP expression. This view was supported by the fact that
eGFP mRNA and protein levels were unaffected in cells transduced with vectors encoding miR-203 inhibitors (Fig. 6B)
due to the lack of miR-203 in the transduced cells. This finding also signified that transcription, stability, and translation
of the inhibitor-containing transcript was not negatively affected by the presence of the inhibitor per se and that any difference in miRNA inhibition potency resulted from inherent
mechanistic differences between the inhibitors and, in the
case of lentiviral delivery, from reduced transfer of the vector.
To further analyze the observed difference in the degree of
miRNA-targeting between the eGFP-Tough Decoy and
eGFP-Bulged Sponge, we constructed an RNA Pol II Tough
Decoy vector (eGFP-4 × Tough Decoy-203) carrying four
consecutive Tough Decoys, i.e., a total of eight miR-203 target sites. To be able to measure eGFP levels with and without
stable expression of miR-203, we established a HEK-293T cell
line stably transfected with a miR-203 expression cassette
(HEK-293T-miR203) and verified high miR-203 expression
by qPCR (miR-203 Ct = 21.8, U48 Ct = 25.7) (cf. Fig. 1C).
Transfection of eGFP-Tough Decoy-203 and eGFP-Bulged
Sponge-203 in naive HEK-293T gave rise to similar eGFP
protein levels, and comparable levels were also observed for

100
80
60
40
20
0

HEK-293T-miR203

D

*

18

**

17
Normalized RLuc:FLuc rao

miRNAs, we measured eGFP protein levels by flow cytometry
in HEK-293 cells transfected with different amounts of plasmids encoding eGFP-fused Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge
inhibitors (Fig. 6A). For decreasing doses of transfected plasmid encoding miR-16 inhibitors, we detected decreasing
levels of eGFP compared to the standard plasmid encoding
unfused eGFP. This demonstrated increased relative suppression of eGFP expression by miR-16 at low doses of the eGFPinhibitor fusion transcript. Notably, this effect was more pronounced for eGFP-Bulged Sponge-16 than for eGFP-Tough
Decoy-16 (P ≤ 0.04), most likely reflecting that the higher
number of target sites in eGFP-Bulged Sponge-16 rendered
the transcript more susceptible to miR16-mediated repression. When the eGFP gene was fused to Tough Decoy and
Bulged Sponge inhibitors targeting miR-203, the eGFP protein levels were not affected at the three plasmid doses, reflecting the minute amount of miR-203 in HEK-293 cells
(Fig. 6A).
To compare the levels of eGFP-inhibitor fusion RNA transcripts after lentiviral delivery, we transduced HEK-293 cells
with equal amounts of lentiviral particles (equal p24 amounts
and the same p24:cell ratio as in the inhibition assay depicted
in Fig. 5A,B) and measured eGFP mRNA and protein levels
by qPCR and flow cytometry, respectively. As shown in
Figure 6B, both mRNA and protein levels were reduced for
the two miR16-targeting vectors compared to the control,
LV/Vehicle, in which eGFP was not fused to an inhibitor.
Notably, eGFP mRNA and protein levels were significantly

16
5

****
****

4
3
2
1

0

FIGURE 6. Analysis of miRNA targeting of the inhibitor-encoding transcript. (A) Flow cytometric analysis of eGFP expression in HEK-293 cells 2 d
after transfection with different amounts of plasmids encoding RNA Pol II-transcribed eGFP fused with Tough Decoy or Bulged Sponge inhibitors
targeting either miR-16 or miR-203. eGFP intensity (relative eGFP expression) is presented relative to the eGFP intensity measured in cells transfected
with the same amount of the standard unfused eGFP-encoding plasmid. (B) Analysis of eGFP-inhibitor transcript levels and eGFP protein levels following lentiviral delivery of eGFP-inhibitors. Transcript and protein levels were evaluated by qPCR and flow cytometry, respectively. (C) Flow cytometric analysis of eGFP expression in naive HEK-293T cells and HEK-293T cells overexpressing miR203 (HEK-293T-miR203) 2 d after transfection
with 12.3 ng of the plasmid encoding RNA Pol II-transcribed eGFP fused with Tough Decoy, Bulged Sponge, or 4 × Tough Decoy (eight miRNA target
sites in four consecutive Tough Decoys) inhibitors targeting miR-203. eGFP intensity (relative eGFP expression) is presented relative to the eGFP
intensity measured in cells transfected with the same amount of the standard unfused eGFP-encoding plasmid. (D) Dual-luciferase assay comparing
Tough Decoy, Bulged Sponge, and 4 × Tough Decoy inhibitors targeting miR-203 and transcribed from RNA Pol II promoters. Data are depicted as
mean + SEM. (∗ ) P < 0.05, (∗∗ ) P < 0.01, (∗∗∗ ) P < 0.001, (∗∗∗∗ ) P < 0.0001.

www.rnajournal.org

287

Bak et al.

eGFP-4 × Tough Decoy-203 (P ≥ 0.20), indicating similar
transcription, stability, and translation of the three inhibitor-containing transcripts in cells with very low levels of
miR-203 (Fig. 6C). In HEK-293T-miR203 cells, we detected
less targeting of eGFP-Tough Decoy-203 compared to eGFPBulged Sponge-203 (P = 0.0054), as previously observed with
miR16-targeting vectors. Interestingly, we detected comparable eGFP levels from vectors encoding eGFP-Bulged Sponge203 and eGFP-4 × Tough-203 Decoy (P = 0.36), signifying
that target sites embedded in a Tough Decoy configuration
were targeted just as strongly by the miRNA as target sites
in a Bulged Sponge configuration.
We next addressed the question of whether this increase in
targeting of the 4 × Tough Decoy would increase the turnover
rate of the inhibitor transcript to an extent that would
decrease inhibition potency, or if the increased targeting
would lead to increased miRNA inhibition. A luciferase assay
showed that, in spite of the equal number of target sites and
equal miRNA targeting, the 4 × Tough Decoy-203 performed
significantly better than the Bulged Sponge-203 (P =
0.000001) (Fig. 6D), implying that the configuration of the
miRNA binding sites in the Tough Decoy enhanced miRNA
inhibition relative to the Bulged Sponge configuration.
In summary, our findings demonstrate that Tough Decoy
inhibitors embedded in RNA Pol II RNA transcripts are
strong inhibitors of miRNA activity. Thus, Tough Decoy inhibitors fused to gene transcripts stand out as an optimal
platform for development and use of lentivirally delivered
miRNA inhibitors.
DISCUSSION
In the past few years, the molecular miRNA toolbox has expanded considerably with numerous strategies to express
and inhibit miRNA function. Several approaches have been
pursued to antagonize miRNA activity with RNA molecules
intracellularly transcribed from a vector of choice, but direct
and compiled comparisons of these approaches have not been
undertaken. In the current study, we compared the efficiency
of seven different vector-encoded miRNA inhibitor designs
expressed from the H1 RNA Pol III promoter. In our experimental setup, neither the shRNA nor the mask design was
efficacious. The five remaining inhibitor designs, all based
on expressing decoy RNAs, displayed variable inhibition potencies. The stabilized antagomiR with terminal hairpins has
previously been shown to increase the inhibitory effect of synthetic antagomiRs (Vermeulen et al. 2007), but such increase
in potency was not apparent in our study of vector-encoded
inhibitors. As previously observed, the Bulged Sponge performed better than the Sponge (Ebert et al. 2007; Gentner
et al. 2009), supporting the notion that miRNA sequestration
by the Bulged Sponge was prolonged by prevention of fast endonucleolytic cleavage. The Tough Decoy inhibitor harbors
identical bulged target sites, but, in spite of the fewer number
of target sites (two vs. eight), the Tough Decoy performed
288

RNA, Vol. 19, No. 2

with higher potency than the Bulged Sponge in inhibition
studies of both miR-16 and miR-203. These results recapitulate what has earlier been observed in head-to-head comparisons of Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors targeting
miR-21 (Haraguchi et al. 2009), miR-122 (Xie et al. 2012),
and let-7 (Xie et al. 2012).
Expressed Bulged Sponge inhibitors perform equally well
both in the context of short RNA Poll III transcripts and as
part of an RNA Pol II transcript of a reporter gene (Ebert
et al. 2007). We envisioned that Tough Decoy inhibitors
would be functional also in the context of longer RNA transcripts expressed from an RNA Pol II promoter, and we,
therefore, fused the inhibitor sequence to the 3′ UTR of
eGFP. In plasmid transfection studies, these Tough Decoy
RNA Pol II transcripts generally performed with comparable
or better potencies than short RNA Pol III Tough Decoy-containing transcripts. Out of eight head-to-head comparisons of
Tough Decoy inhibitors expressed as RNA Pol III or Pol II
transcripts targeting different miRNAs, only a single Tough
Decoy performed with reduced potency as part of an RNA
Pol II transcript, whereas equal or improved potencies were
observed for the remaining seven Tough Decoys when expressed as part of RNA Pol II transcripts. However, since
inhibitor potency is highly dependent on inhibitor concentration, as we observed in the titration experiments (data
not shown), a direct comparison between the RNA Pol II
and Pol III systems is difficult since it is strongly influenced
by the choice of promoter. Gentner et al. have shown for
a miR16-targeting Sponge that, when expressed from the
strong spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) promoter, only
three lentiviral vector copies were required to achieve the
same miRNA inhibition level as 15 vector copies when expressed from the PGK promoter (Gentner et al. 2009).
Thus, in our study, miRNA inhibition could likely be improved by using stronger promoters such as the RNA Pol
III U6 promoter or, e.g., the RNA Pol II SFFV promoter.
This could be combined with using increased amounts of
lentiviral vectors, e.g., by concentrating vectors by ultracentrifugation. However, we conclude that embedding the highly
structured Tough Decoy inhibitor in a long RNA Pol II-driven RNA transcript is a feasible and highly potent approach
to suppress miRNA activity. This is an important finding,
demonstrating the feasibility of expressing a transgene and
the Tough Decoy inhibitor from a monocistronic transgene
cassette. This may simplify vector composition and reduce
the overall vector size, which can be crucial for small viral vectors with confined packaging capacity such as recombinant
adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors. RNA Pol III promoters are limited in numbers and are ubiquitously expressed
lacking temporal and spatial control, although inducible
RNA Pol III promoters based on expression of Cre and Tet
transactivators were previously established (van de Wetering
et al. 2003; Tiscornia et al. 2004; Ventura et al. 2004;
Wiznerowicz et al. 2006). Obviously, a wealth of RNA Pol II
promoters, in contrast, includes numerous promoters with

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

tissue-specific expression profiles as well as inducible promoters. RNA Pol II-transcribed Tough Decoy inhibitors may,
therefore, be genetically tailored for expression in certain
cell types and tissues or, alternatively, for induced expression
allowing confined and regulated miRNA inhibition. Recent
studies have exploited the hepatotropism of rAAV9 and adenoviral vectors to express RNA Pol III-transcribed Tough
Decoys targeting miR-122 specifically in the liver to reduce
cholesterol levels and suppress replication of hepatitis C virus,
respectively (Sakurai et al. 2012; Xie et al. 2012). These vectors
were administered systemically, and confined liver expression
of the Tough Decoys might be improved by the use of liverspecific RNA Pol II promoters, such as the α-1 antitrypsin
(hAAT) promoter fused to the ApoE locus control region
(Miao et al. 2000).
Our data showed that four out of five eGFP-Tough Decoy
fusions targeting different miRNAs performed equal to or
better than their Bulged Sponge counterparts. In addition,
lentivirally delivered eGFP-Tough Decoy fusion transcripts
inhibited the activity of miR-16 and miR-203 to levels that
were comparable with suppression obtained with RNA Pol
III-transcribed Tough Decoy inhibitors (cf. Figs. 2C,D and
5A,B). As the Tough Decoy hairpin maintains its functionality in the context of an RNA Pol II transcript, these findings
suggest that the high potency of Tough Decoy inhibitors is
not caused by features unique to the small RNA, such as enhanced nuclear export promoted by Exportin-5. However,
the reduced activity observed for RNA Pol III- and Pol IItranscribed Tough Decoy inhibitors targeting miR-143 and
RNA Pol III-transcribed Tough Decoy inhibitors targeting
miR-195 relative to their Bulged Sponge counterparts may
indicate that adverse secondary structures occasionally compromise Tough Decoy functionality. Issues have been raised
recently that, for certain targeted miRNAs, the sequence
composition of the two opposing target sites in the Tough
Decoy hairpin may favor mutual annealing leading to partial
structural collapse of the Tough Decoy, resulting in impaired
potency (Haraguchi et al. 2012).
Inhibition efficiency following lentiviral delivery of miRNA
inhibitors depends on a range of parameters, including vector
integrity during vector production, viral encapsidation of vector RNA, efficiency of reverse transcription, transcriptional
efficiency of the inhibitor cassette, as well as inhibitor binding
and sequestration of the miRNA. Initial analyses of transductional titers by the use of the puromycin resistance gene
(PAC) in the vectors indicated that PAC expression for
some of the miR16-targeting vectors was strongly regulated
via the miRNA inhibitor sequence which was present in the
3′ UTR of PAC. Such targeting by endogenous miRNAs was
highly dependent on the inhibitor design carried by the vector. Notably, a large difference was evident between Tough
Decoy-16 and the Bulged Sponge-16, with the latter giving
rise to a 100-fold reduction in colony-forming units compared to the Tough Decoy-encoding vector. This indicated
that the Tough Decoy design was much less vulnerable for tar-

geting by miRNAs despite its robust miRNA-suppressive potential. To investigate the integral effect of miRNA targeting
of the viral genome in producer and recipient cells, we quantified the number of integrating vectors for both Pol III- and
Pol II-encoded inhibitors. A seven- and fivefold reduction in
titers (for RNA Pol III and Pol II, respectively) was evident for
vectors encoding Bulged Sponge-16 compared to vectors encoding Tough Decoy-16. These findings indicated that
miRNAs in the virus-producing cells and possibly the recipient cells contributed to a decrease in viral transductional titers
by targeting vector RNA. In line with this notion, vectors encoding miR203-targeting inhibitors did not display a statistically significant difference in vector production and the
number of integrating vectors, most possibly as a reflection
of the limited amount of miR-203 in the virus-producing
cells. Following lentiviral delivery of the RNA Pol II-driven
Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors, we were able
to detect decreased levels of the targeted miRNA by qPCR.
These results indicate that the inhibitors cause degradation
of the targeted miRNAs, which has previously been reported
for Tough Decoys (Xie et al. 2012). However, alternatively
it has also been shown that transcribed RNA transcripts
antisense to the miRNA can sequester the miRNAs, rendering them unavailable for miRNA cDNA synthesis or probing during Northern Blotting (Scherr et al. 2007). Indeed,
some reports have not been able to show decreased miRNA
levels following miRNA inhibition with Bulged Sponges or
Tough Decoys (Ebert et al. 2007; Gentner et al. 2009;
Sakurai et al. 2012). One report found decreased miRNA
levels upon miRNA inhibition with Tough Decoys as detected
by qPCR, but Northern blotting at high temperatures to avoid
dsRNA formation failed to validate this decrease (Haraguchi
et al. 2009). Thus, we believe that the observed decrease in
miR-16 and miR-203 levels might not quantitatively reflect
reduced miRNA levels but rather a combination of miRNA
degradation and miRNA sequestration.
Analysis of inhibitor levels following plasmid transfection
or lentiviral delivery showed similar transcript levels for the
Tough Decoy and Bulged Sponge inhibitors targeting
miR-203. This indicated that neither of the two inhibitors
negatively affected transcription of the eGFP fusion transcript. However, both variants of miR16-targeting inhibitors
showed reduced transcript levels compared to wild-type
eGFP, which we attribute to targeting of the transcript by
endogenous miR-16. Interestingly, when delivered by lentiviral transduction, eGFP-Tough Decoy-16 transcript levels
were reduced by 34%, whereas the eGFP-Bulged Sponge-16
levels were reduced by 73% compared to unfused eGFP
transcripts, implying that Tough Decoy-containing transcripts were more resistant to miRNA-mediated regulation.
Analysis of eGFP protein expression showed that the reduction of protein levels matched the reduced transcript
levels. This supports recent claims that mRNA destabilization
is the major regulatory mechanism induced by miRNAs
(Guo et al. 2010; Huntzinger and Izaurralde 2011). To further
www.rnajournal.org

289

Bak et al.

characterize the significance of the structural differences between the Tough Decoy and the Bulged Sponge, we constructed a 4 × Tough Decoy vector carrying a total of eight miRNA
target sites in four consecutive Tough Decoys. This transcript
resembles that of the Bulged Sponge, both carrying the same
number of identical target sites, but embedded in different
structural contexts. We showed that miRNA-targeting of the
4 × Tough Decoy was similar to the Bulged Sponge, implying
that regulation of eGFP levels via the miRNA target sites in
the inhibitor sequence is dependent on the number of
miRNA target sites rather than on differences in the spatial
configuration of the target sites between the Tough Decoy
and the Bulged Sponge. We next addressed the question of
whether such targeting of the inhibitor transcript would
give rise to increased miRNA inhibition or rather would prevent inhibitor levels to reach a certain threshold level required
for efficient inhibition. Analysis of the inhibition potency of
the 4 × Tough Decoy showed a significant improvement in
miRNA inhibition relative to the Tough Decoy and the
Bulged Sponge inhibitors, indicating that miRNA inhibition
is proportional to the degree of miRNA-targeting of the inhibitor. However, since the 4 × Tough Decoy and the
Bulged Sponge are targeted equally, this indicates that the
number of target sites is not the only parameter important
for inhibition efficiency.
In summary, our data demonstrate that Tough Decoy and
Bulged Sponge inhibitors are robust inhibitors of miRNA action. The fact that Tough Decoy inhibitors contain only two
miRNA recognition sites is not reflected by reduced activity
compared to Bulged Sponge inhibitors containing eight
miRNA target sites. Our findings suggest that the Tough
Decoy inhibitor contains inherent structural features that
support miRNA inhibition. It may be speculated that the
structure allows prolonged interaction with the miRNA,
thus slowing the enzymatic turnover rate of the miRNA-loaded RISC. We demonstrate high activity of RNA Pol II-transcribed Tough Decoy inhibitors, supporting the use of this
platform for future applications of DNA-encoded miRNA inhibitors, including applications that require spatial and/or
temporal control of inhibitor expression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Lausanne, Switzerland). To monitor miRNA activity, a perfect target
site for the miRNA was fused to the Renilla luciferase 3′ UTR in the
psiCHECK-2 vector (Promega) by cloning annealed oligonucleotides carrying the target sequence into the XhoI and NotI restriction
sites of psiCHECK-2. miRNA sequences were derived from miRBase
(mirbase.org). For cloning of antagomiRs, stabilized antagomiRs,
shRNAs, and masks, phosphorylated and annealed oligonucleotides
were cloned into pCCL-PGK-Puro-H1-MCS (digested with AvrII/
AscI) (see Supplemental Table T1 for oligonucleotide sequences).
For cloning of Tough Decoys, Sponges, and Bulged Sponges, DNA
sequences containing the inhibitor sequences flanked by NheI/
AscI sites were synthesized and cloned into pUC57 by GenScript.
The inhibitor sequences were released from the purchased pUC57
plasmids with NheI/AscI and cloned into AvrII/AscI-digested
pCCL-PGK-Puro-H1-MCS or pCCL-PGK-eGFP-H1-MCS. For
the construction of lentiviral vectors encoding Pol II inhibitors,
sequences including the Tough Decoys and Bulged Sponges were
PCR-amplified from the lentiviral vectors encoding the H1-driven
inhibitors using primers 5′ -AAAAGGTACCGTATGAGACCA
CCCTAGCCC-3′ (s) and 5′ -AAAAGGTACCCAGAGAGACCCAG
TACAAGC-3′ (as). The PCR fragments were cloned into pCCLPGK-eGFP in the sense orientation using the KpnI restriction site
located between the WPRE region and U3. pCCL-PGK-eGFP-4 ×
Tough Decoy-203 was cloned analogously by sequential cloning of
the Tough Decoy-203 sequence, PCR-amplified with primers introducing additional restriction sites for sequential insertion of the four
Tough Decoy sequences. For miR-203, miR-143, miR-145, miR146a, miR-221, and miR-222, endogenous miRNA levels were reported to be very low by the smiRNAdb miRNA expression database
(http://www.mirz.unibas.ch/cloningprofiles/), and a plasmid expressing the miRNA/miRNA cluster was included in these inhibition
assays. The miRNA expression plasmids were constructed by PCR
amplification of the genomic region containing the miRNA region/cluster and subsequent insertion of NotI-digested PCR fragment into NotI-digested Sleeping Beauty transposon vector, pT2/
CMV-eGFP.SV40-neo (Staunstrup et al. 2012). All constructs were
verified by sequencing. The 293T-miR203 cell line stably overexpressing miR-203 was constructed by first exchanging the neomycin
resistance gene in the transposon vector encoding miR-203 (pT2/
CMV-premiR203.SV40-neo) with a hygromycin resistance gene.
Next, 293T cells were transfected with this transposon plasmid
and a plasmid encoding a Sleeping Beauty transposase (SB100X)
and subsequently subjected to selection with hygromycin. Clones
were isolated, and a single clone with marked overexpression of
miR-203, as detected by miRNA quantitative Real-Time PCR
(qPCR), was selected for further experiments.

Plasmids

Cell culturing

For expression of miRNA inhibitors, a lentiviral third generation
SIN-vector was used. For Pol III-expressed inhibitors, we used the
pCCL-PGK-Puro-H1-MCS plasmid, described in Bak et al.
(2011), in which the H1 promoter drives the expression of the
miRNA inhibitors from an expression cassette located in the U3 region. We also generated a variant of this plasmid encoding eGFP
(pCCL-PGK-eGFP-H1-MCS) by exchanging the XhoI/BamHIflanked puromycin resistance gene with the XhoI/BamHI-flanked
eGFP from the lentiviral SIN-vector pCCL-PGK-eGFP (originally
designated pCCL.WPS.PGK-eGFP.WHV; a kind gift from Dr.
Patrick Aebischer, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, EPFL,

HeLa, HEK-293, HEK-293T, HaCaT, and MCF-7 cells were cultured at standard conditions at 37°C in 5% (v/v) CO2 and maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Cambrex)
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, penicillin (100 U/mL),
streptomycin (0.1 mg/mL), and L-glutamine (265 mg/L).

290

RNA, Vol. 19, No. 2

Production of lentiviral vectors
Lentiviral vectors were produced in HEK-293T cells which were
seeded in 10-cm dishes (4 × 106 cells/well). Twenty-four hours after
seeding, cells were transfected with a standard calcium phosphate

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

protocol with 3.75 μg pMD.2G, 3 μg pRSV-Rev, 13 μg pMDLg/
pRRE, and 13 μg lentiviral transfer vector. Twenty-four hours
post-transfection, the medium was changed, and 48 h post-transfection, the viral supernatant was harvested, filtered through 0.45-μm
filters to remove cellular debris (Sarstedt), and stored at −70°C.
For all transductional experiments, polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich)
was added to the virus and supplementary medium at a final concentration of 8 μg/mL. All lentiviral vector preparations were produced in biological triplicates, and the yield of each separate
vector preparation was determined by measurements of p24 capsid
protein using an HIV-1 p24 Antigen ELISA Kit (ZeptoMetrix) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Titer assays
For colony-forming transductional titer determination, cells were
seeded in six-well plates (5 × 104 cells/well). On the following day,
cells were transduced with viral vectors in serial dilutions. One day
post-transduction, puromycin selection was applied (1 µg/mL) for
1 wk before counting the number of colonies. Viral titers (colonyforming units per mL) were calculated by dividing the number of colonies with the dilution factor. For titer assays quantifying the number
of lentiviral integrations, cells were seeded in six-well plates (5 × 104
cells/well) and transduced on the following day with different
amounts of lentiviral vectors. Additional medium was added to
each well to ensure that the total volume in each well was 2 mL.
The following day, the medium was changed, and 4 d after transduction, DNA was extracted from each well by a standard NaCl/EtOH
precipitation protocol. Quantitative PCR was performed with
TaqMan Universal Master Mix II (Applied Biosystems) using primers
and probe specific for the WPRE sequence present in the lentiviral
vector. Primers and probe specific for albumin were used to normalize for the amount of gDNA. Primers and probes were as follows:
WPRE_forward: 5′ -GGCACTGACAATTCCGTGGT-3′ , WPRE_re
verse: 5′ -AGGGACGTAGCAGAAGGACG-3′ , WPRE_probe: 5′ -AC
GTCCTTTCCATGGCTGCTCGC-3′ (FAM-BHQ), Alb_forward:
5′ -GCTGTCATCTCTTGTGGGCTGT-3′ , Alb_reverse: 5′ -ACTCA
TGGGAGCTGCTGGTTC-3′ , Alb_probe: 5′ -CCTGTCATGCCCA
CACAAATCTCTCC-3′ (FAM-BHQ). Total proviral copy numbers
were determined using the standard curve method. Briefly, a standard
curve for each target was made from serial dilutions of plasmids containing the two targets. For WPRE, the pCCL-PGK-Puro-H1-MCS
plasmid was used, and for albumin, we used pAlbumin, which was
a kind gift from Didier Trono (School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne [EPFL], Lausanne, Switzerland)
(plasmid obtained from Addgene, plasmid #22037). The standard
curves were used to calculate the copy number of WPRE sequences
per cell which, in turn, was used, together with the number of transduced cells and inoculating vector volume, to calculate the number of
integrating viral genomes per mL. All titer assays were performed on
three separate virus productions of the same vector.

Validation of the integrity of the inhibitor
expression cassette
HeLa cells were seeded in six-well plates (5 × 104) and transduced
the following day at an MOI << 1 to obtain a population expected
to have a single lentiviral integration per cell. The following day, puromycin selection was applied (1 µg/mL), and the cells were allowed

to expand, after which DNA was extracted by a standard NaCl/EtOH
precipitation protocol. The extracted gDNA was used as the template for 35 cycles of PCR amplification using DreamTaq polymerase (Fermentas) with primers spanning the miRNA inhibitor.
Forward primer: 5′ -CGATAAGCTTGATATCGAAT-3′ . Reverse
primer: 5′ -CGGCCGCGGCGCGCCTTTCC-3′ . As positive controls, the corresponding plasmids with the inhibitor cassettes were
used as template.

Dual-luciferase reporter assay
For cotransfection experiments with psiCHECK plasmids and inhibitor-encoding plasmids, cells were seeded in 96-well white plates
(3 × 103 cells/well) 1 d before transfection. Cotransfections were
performed with a total of 40 ng or 43 ng of DNA, depending on
the necessity of including a miRNA expression plasmid (34 ng inhibitor-encoding plasmid, 6 ng psiCHECK plasmid, and 3 ng
miRNA-encoding plasmid) using FuGENE-6 (Roche) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. For titration studies of the inhibitor-encoding plasmid, total DNA levels were kept fixed at 40 or
43 ng DNA/well using the pUC19 plasmid as supplementary
DNA. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, Renilla- and firefly-luciferase activities were analyzed by the use of the Dual-Glo Luciferase
Assay System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Briefly, medium was decanted from the cells, new medium was added (75 µL/well), and the cells were left to equilibrate to room temperature for 20 min. Dual-Glo Reagent was added to the medium
(75 µL/well) and after 10 min, firefly luminescence was measured.
Dual-Glo Stop & Glo Reagent was then added to the wells, and after
another 10 min, Renilla luminescence was measured. All luminescence readings were performed in a multisample plate-reading
luminometer (Berthold) with 10-sec integration time. Renilla luciferase activities were normalized to firefly luciferase activities and
presented relative to a negative vehicle control set to 1. In transduction studies of inhibitor-encoding lentiviral vectors, cells were seeded in 96-well white plates 1 d before transduction (3 × 103 cells/well)
and transduced with the same amount of lentiviral vectors (25 ng
CA-p24/well) that were diluted at least twofold in DMEM and supplemented with 8 μg/mL polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich). One day posttransduction, the medium was changed, and cells were transfected
with 6 ng psiCHECK plasmid and, in the case of the miR-203 assay,
3 ng miR203-expressing plasmid (pT2/CMV-pri-miR-203.SV40neo) using FuGENE-6 (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Luciferase activities were measured 48 h post-transfection
as described above. All dual-luciferase assay experiments were performed at least in biological triplicates and the data summarized as
mean + SEM.

miRNA, mRNA, and protein quantification
For eGFP mRNA quantification, total RNA was isolated using the
E.Z.N.A. Total RNA Kit I (Omega Bio-tek). For miRNA and
TNFα quantification, total RNA, including small RNAs, was purified using the SV Total RNA Isolation System (Promega) or the
mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit (Ambion). First-strand cDNA synthesis was performed using the Maxima First Strand cDNA
Synthesis Kit for qPCR (Fermentas) according to the manufacturer’s
guidelines, and miRNA cDNA synthesis was performed using the
TaqMan MicroRNA Reverse Transcription Kit according to the
www.rnajournal.org

291

Bak et al.

manufacturer’s guidelines (Applied Biosystems). All qPCR reactions
were performed using the TaqMan Universal Master Mix II
(Applied Biosystems). For eGFP quantification, we used the following primers and probes: eGFP_forward: 5′ -CTGCTGCCCGAC
AACCAC-3′ , eGFP_reverse: 5′ -TGTGATCGCGCTTCTCGTT-3′ ,
eGFP_probe: 5′ -ACCTGAGCACCCAGTCCGCCCT-3′ (FAM-T
amra). For TNFα and the reference gene RPLP0, we purchased
primers and probe (gene expression assay ID Hs00174128_m1
and Hs99999902_m1, respectively) from Applied Biosystems. For
miRNA qPCR, we used TaqMan MicroRNA Assays for the specific
miRNA and U48 as a reference small RNA (Applied Biosystems).
Relative mRNA and miRNA levels were determined using the relative standard curve method. Briefly, a standard curve for each gene
was made from serial dilutions of the cDNA. The standard curve
was then used to calculate relative amounts of target RNA in the
samples. Mean RNA values were calculated and the data summarized as mean ± SEM. For flow cytometric determination of eGFP
levels, cells were prepared for flow cytometric analysis by formaldehyde fixation and analyzed for eGFP fluorescence on a BD
FACSCalibur (Becton, Dickinson).

Statistical analyses
All P-values were calculated by a two-tailed Student’s t-test to test
the null hypothesis of no difference between two compared groups.
The assumption of equal variances was tested by the F-test. Viral
transductional titers were compared by statistical analysis on logtransformed data. In all statistical analyses, P-values <0.05 were considered significant.

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Supplemental material is available for this article.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was made possible by support from the Lundbeck
Foundation, the Novo Nordisk Foundation, The Danish Heart
Foundation, Kgl. Hofbuntmager Aage Bangs Fond, Grosserer
A. V. Lykfeldts Legat, Agnes og Poul Friis Fond, and Aase og
Ejnar Danielsens Fond. R.O.B. is the recipient of a PhD fellowship
from the Faculty of Health Sciences at Aarhus University funded
by the Lundbeck Foundation and Aarhus University.
Received June 12, 2012; accepted November 9, 2012.

REFERENCES
Ameres SL, Martinez J, Schroeder R. 2007. Molecular basis for target
RNA recognition and cleavage by human RISC. Cell 130: 101–112.
An W, Telesnitsky A. 2001. Frequency of direct repeat deletion in a human immunodeficiency virus type 1 vector during reverse transcription in human cells. Virology 286: 475–482.
Bak RO, Stenderup K, Rosada C, Petersen LB, Moldt B, DagnaesHansen F, Jakobsen M, Kamp S, Jensen TG, Dam TN, et al. 2011.
Targeting of human interleukin-12B by small hairpin RNAs in xenografted psoriatic skin. BMC Dermatol 11: 5.
Care A, Catalucci D, Felicetti F, Bonci D, Addario A, Gallo P, Bang ML,
Segnalini P, Gu Y, Dalton ND, et al. 2007. MicroRNA-133 controls
cardiac hypertrophy. Nat Med 13: 613–618.

292

RNA, Vol. 19, No. 2

Chang K, Elledge SJ, Hannon GJ. 2006. Lessons from Nature:
MicroRNA-based shRNA libraries. Nat Methods 3: 707–714.
Choi WY, Giraldez AJ, Schier AF. 2007. Target protectors reveal dampening and balancing of Nodal agonist and antagonist by miR-430.
Science 318: 271–274.
Davis S, Lollo B, Freier S, Esau C. 2006. Improved targeting of miRNA
with antisense oligonucleotides. Nucleic Acids Res 34: 2294–2304.
Dickins RA, Hemann MT, Zilfou JT, Simpson DR, Ibarra I, Hannon GJ,
Lowe SW. 2005. Probing tumor phenotypes using stable and regulated synthetic microRNA precursors. Nat Genet 37: 1289–1295.
Ebert MS, Neilson JR, Sharp PA. 2007. MicroRNA sponges: Competitive
inhibitors of small RNAs in mammalian cells. Nat Methods 4:
721–726.
Elbashir SM, Lendeckel W, Tuschl T. 2001. RNA interference is mediated by 21- and 22-nucleotide RNAs. Genes Dev 15: 188–200.
Gentner B, Schira G, Giustacchini A, Amendola M, Brown BD,
Ponzoni M, Naldini L. 2009. Stable knockdown of microRNA in
vivo by lentiviral vectors. Nat Methods 6: 63–66.
Gilboa E, Mitra SW, Goff S, Baltimore D. 1979. A detailed model of reverse transcription and tests of crucial aspects. Cell 18: 93–100.
Guimaraes-Sternberg C, Meerson A, Shaked I, Soreq H. 2006.
MicroRNA modulation of megakaryoblast fate involves cholinergic
signaling. Leuk Res 30: 583–595.
Gumireddy K, Young DD, Xiong X, Hogenesch JB, Huang Q, Deiters A.
2008. Small-molecule inhibitors of microrna miR-21 function.
Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 47: 7482–7484.
Guo H, Ingolia NT, Weissman JS, Bartel DP. 2010. Mammalian
microRNAs predominantly act to decrease target mRNA levels.
Nature 466: 835–840.
Haraguchi T, Ozaki Y, Iba H. 2009. Vectors expressing efficient RNA decoys achieve the long-term suppression of specific microRNA activity in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids Res 37: e43.
Haraguchi T, Nakano H, Tagawa T, Ohki T, Ueno Y, Yoshida T, Iba H.
2012. A potent 2′ -O-methylated RNA-based microRNA inhibitor
with unique secondary structures. Nucleic Acids Res 40: e58.
Huntzinger E, Izaurralde E. 2011. Gene silencing by microRNAs:
Contributions of translational repression and mRNA decay. Nat
Rev Genet 12: 99–110.
Hutvágner G, Simard MJ, Mello CC, Zamore PD. 2004. Sequence-specific inhibition of small RNA function. PLoS Biol 2: E98.
Jing Q, Huang S, Guth S, Zarubin T, Motoyama A, Chen J, Di Padova F,
Lin SC, Gram H, Han J. 2005. Involvement of microRNA in AU-rich
element-mediated mRNA instability. Cell 120: 623–634.
Lee YS, Kim HK, Chung S, Kim KS, Dutta A. 2005. Depletion of human
micro-RNA miR-125b reveals that it is critical for the proliferation of
differentiated cells but not for the down-regulation of putative targets during differentiation. J Biol Chem 280: 16635–16641.
Lund E, Guttinger S, Calado A, Dahlberg JE, Kutay U. 2004. Nuclear export of microRNA precursors. Science 303: 95–98.
McDermott AM, Heneghan HM, Miller N, Kerin MJ. 2011. The therapeutic potential of microRNAs: Disease modulators and drug targets. Pharm Res 28: 3016–3029.
McIntyre GJ, Yu YH, Tran A, Jaramillo AB, Arndt AJ, Millington ML,
Boyd MP, Elliott FA, Shen SW, Murray JM, et al. 2009. Cassette deletion in multiple shRNA lentiviral vectors for HIV-1 and its impact
on treatment success. Virol J 6: 184.
Medina PP, Slack FJ. 2009. Inhibiting microRNA function in vivo. Nat
Methods 6: 37–38.
Miao CH, Ohashi K, Patijn GA, Meuse L, Ye X, Thompson AR, Kay MA.
2000. Inclusion of the hepatic locus control region, an intron, and
untranslated region increases and stabilizes hepatic factor IX gene
expression in vivo but not in vitro. Mol Ther 1: 522–532.
Mullokandov G, Baccarini A, Ruzo A, Jayaprakash AD, Tung N,
Israelow B, Evans MJ, Sachidanandam R, Brown BD. 2012.
High-throughput assessment of microRNA activity and function using microRNA sensor and decoy libraries. Nat Methods 9:
840–846.
Naldini L, Blomer U, Gallay P, Ory D, Mulligan R, Gage FH,
Verma IM, Trono D. 1996. In vivo gene delivery and stable trans-

RNA Pol II-transcribed ‘Tough Decoy’ miRNA inhibitors

duction of nondividing cells by a lentiviral vector. Science 272:
263–267.
Okada C, Yamashita E, Lee SJ, Shibata S, Katahira J, Nakagawa A,
Yoneda Y, Tsukihara T. 2009. A high-resolution structure of the
pre-microRNA nuclear export machinery. Science 326: 1275–1279.
Primo MN, Bak RO, Schibler B, Mikkelsen JG. 2012. Regulation of proinflammatory cytokines TNFα and IL24 by microRNA-203 in primary keratinocytes. Cytokine 60: 741–748.
Sakurai F, Furukawa N, Higuchi M, Okamoto S, Ono K, Yoshida T,
Kondoh M, Yagi K, Sakamoto N, Katayama K, et al. 2012.
Suppression of hepatitis C virus replicon by adenovirus vector-mediated expression of tough decoy RNA against miR-122a. Virus Res
165: 214–218.
Scherr M, Venturini L, Battmer K, Schaller-Schoenitz M, Schaefer D,
Dallmann I, Ganser A, Eder M. 2007. Lentivirus-mediated antagomir expression for specific inhibition of miRNA function. Nucleic
Acids Res 35: e149.
Staunstrup NH, Madsen J, Primo MP, Li J, Liu Y, Kragh PM, Li R,
Schmidt M, Purup S, Dagnaes-Hansen F, et al. 2012. Development
of transgenic cloned pig models of skin inflammation by DNA transposon-directed ectopic expression of human β1 and α2 integrin.
PLoS One 7: e36658.
ter Brake O, t Hooft K, Liu YP, Centlivre M, von Eije KJ, Berkhout B.
2008. Lentiviral vector design for multiple shRNA expression and
durable HIV-1 inhibition. Mol Ther 16: 557–564.
Tiscornia G, Tergaonkar V, Galimi F, Verma IM. 2004. CRE recombinase-inducible RNA interference mediated by lentiviral vectors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci 101: 7347–7351.
Urbinati F, Arumugam P, Higashimoto T, Perumbeti A, Mitts K, Xia P,
Malik P. 2009. Mechanism of reduction in titers from lentivirus vectors carrying large inserts in the 3′ LTR. Mol Ther 17: 1527–1536.
van de Wetering M, Oving I, Muncan V, Pon Fong MT, Brantjes H, van
Leenen D, Holstege FC, Brummelkamp TR, Agami R, Clevers H.

2003. Specific inhibition of gene expression using a stably integrated,
inducible small-interfering-RNA vector. EMBO Rep 4: 609–615.
Vasudevan S, Tong Y, Steitz JA. 2007. Switching from repression to activation: MicroRNAs can up-regulate translation. Science 318:
1931–1934.
Ventura A, Meissner A, Dillon CP, McManus M, Sharp PA, Van Parijs L,
Jaenisch R, Jacks T. 2004. Cre-lox-regulated conditional RNA interference from transgenes. Proc Natl Acad Sci 101: 10380–10385.
Vermeulen A, Robertson B, Dalby AB, Marshall WS, Karpilow J,
Leake D, Khvorova A, Baskerville S. 2007. Double-stranded regions
are essential design components of potent inhibitors of RISC function. RNA 13: 723–730.
Wang X, Han L, Zhang A, Wang G, Jia Z, Yang Y, Yue X, Pu P, Shen C,
Kang C. 2011. Adenovirus-mediated shRNAs for co-repression of
miR-221 and miR-222 expression and function in glioblastoma cells.
Oncol Rep 25: 97–105.
Wiznerowicz M, Szulc J, Trono D. 2006. Tuning silence: Conditional
systems for RNA interference. Nat Methods 3: 682–688.
Xie J, Ameres SL, Friedline R, Hung JH, Zhang Y, Xie Q, Zhong L, Su Q,
He R, Li M, et al. 2012. Long-term, efficient inhibition of microRNA
function in mice using rAAV vectors. Nat Methods 9: 403–409.
Young DD, Connelly CM, Grohmann C, Deiters A. 2010. Small molecule modifiers of microRNA miR-122 function for the treatment
of hepatitis C virus infection and hepatocellular carcinoma. J Am
Chem Soc 132: 7976–7981.
Zeng Y, Wagner EJ, Cullen BR. 2002. Both natural and designed micro
RNAs can inhibit the expression of cognate mRNAs when expressed
in human cells. Mol Cell 9: 1327–1333.
Zeng Y, Cai X, Cullen BR. 2005. Use of RNA polymerase II to transcribe
artificial microRNAs. Methods Enzymol 392: 371–380.
Zhang S, Chen L, Jung EJ, Calin GA. 2010. Targeting microRNAs with
small molecules: From dream to reality. Clin Pharmacol Ther 87:
754–758.

www.rnajournal.org

293

