Journal of Neurochemislry. 1961, Vol. 6, p. 367. Pergamon Press Lid. prinrcd in Northern Ireland

ANNOUNCEMENT

Seventh International Congress of Nenrology
(Rome, 10-15 September 1961)
THESeventh International Congress of Neurology will be held in Rome, September 1CL15, 1961,
under the auspices of the World Federation of Neurology and of the National Institute for Nervous
Diseases and Blindness, of Bethesda.
Topics for the scientific sessions include “Neurological disorders in porphyria, phenyketonuria
and galactosuria”, ‘‘Neurological disorders related to liver diseases”, “Brain disturbances associated
with cardiopulmonary disorders” and “Aphasia”.
A few Symposia will be held as well, among which a particularly important one is that of Neurochemistry, which will deal with “Lipids, Lipoproteins and their Metabolism” and with “Changes in
Myelin”. A Symposium on Neurological Genetics will be held jointly with the Third International
Conference of Genetics (Rome, 7-12 September 1961). The other Symposia will deal with Neurological Geography, History of Neurology and Multiple Sclerosis.
The fourth day of the Congress will be dedicated to communications on major topics and free
communications, which will be selected by the Congress Secretariat. Communications, whether
related to a major topic or not, will be published or summarized in precirculated booklets provided
they reach the Office of the Secretary General of the Congress on or before the 15 March, 1961, in
triplicate text with an English summary of 500 words.
The Congress will have three categories of membership: Active member open to members of the
constituent national neurological societies; Associate member, open to qualiied physicians and
scientists having an interest in the Congress; Adjrrnct member, open to interested non-professionals
and to families of members of the Congress. Registration fees are 515.00 (or equivalent in Italian lire)
for Active Members; $10.00 for Associate members, 85.00 for Adjunct members.
or from the
Information is available from the President of the Congress, Prof. MARIOGOZZANO
Secretary General, Dr. GIOVANNI
ALEMA,Viale Universitti 30,Rome. For the Symposium of New+
chemistry, information should be asked from D r . A R m m L~WENTHAL,
Secretary for Neurochemistry,
World Federation of Neurology, 59, rue Philippe Williot, Berchem-Anvers (Belgium). Dr. J m L.
OLEARY,
M.D., Washington University School of Medicine, 600 S. Kingshighway,St. Louis, 10, Mo.,
will issue forms, receive registration applications and fees, and transmit communications to the
Secretary General.
ill
The Fifth International Congress of Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology w
be held at Rome from the 7th to the 13th September 1961.
Information is obtainable from the President of the Congress, Prof. MARIO
G o z z ~ ~ or
o , from
the Secretary General, Dr. RAFFAELO
VIZIOLI,Viale Universitti 30, Rome.

361

