Cell, Vol. 116, 281–297, January 23, 2004, Copyright 2004 by Cell Press

MicroRNAs: Genomics,
Biogenesis, Mechanism, and Function
David P. Bartel1,2,*
1
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
9 Cambridge Center
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142
2
Department of Biology
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous ⵑ22 nt RNAs
that can play important regulatory roles in animals and
plants by targeting mRNAs for cleavage or translational repression. Although they escaped notice until
relatively recently, miRNAs comprise one of the more
abundant classes of gene regulatory molecules in
multicellular organisms and likely influence the output
of many protein-coding genes.

In an investigation inspiring for both its perseverance
and its scientific insight, Victor Ambros and colleagues,
Rosalind Lee and Rhonda Feinbaum, discovered that
lin-4, a gene known to control the timing of C. elegans
larval development, does not code for a protein but
instead produces a pair of small RNAs (Lee et al., 1993).
One RNA is approximately 22 nt in length, and the other
is approximately 61 nt; the longer one was predicted to
fold into a stem loop proposed to be the precursor of
the shorter one. The Ambros and Ruvkun labs then noticed that these lin-4 RNAs had antisense complementarity to multiple sites in the 3⬘ UTR of the lin-14 gene
(Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993). This complementarity fell in a region of the 3⬘ UTR previously proposed to mediate the repression of lin-14 by the lin-4
gene product (Wightman et al., 1991). The Ruvkun lab
went on to demonstrate the importance of these complementary sites for regulation of lin-14 by lin-4, showing
also that this regulation substantially reduces the
amount of LIN-14 protein without noticeable change
in levels of lin-14 mRNA. Together, these discoveries
supported a model in which the lin-4 RNAs pair to the
lin-14 3⬘ UTR to specify translational repression of the
lin-14 message as part of the regulatory pathway that
triggers the transition from cell divisions of the first larval
stage to those of the second (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman
et al., 1993).
The shorter lin-4 RNA is now recognized as the founding member of an abundant class of tiny regulatory RNAs
called microRNAs or miRNAs (Lagos-Quintana et al.,
2001; Lau et al., 2001; Lee and Ambros, 2001). The
breadth and importance of miRNA-directed gene regulation are coming into focus as more miRNAs and their
regulatory targets and functions are discovered. Recently discovered miRNA functions include control of
cell proliferation, cell death, and fat metabolism in flies
(Brennecke et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2003), neuronal patterning in nematodes (Johnston and Hobert, 2003), mod*Correspondence: dbartel@wi.mit.edu

Review

ulation of hematopoietic lineage differentiation in mammals (Chen et al., 2004), and control of leaf and flower
development in plants (Aukerman and Sakai, 2003;
Chen, 2003; Emery et al., 2003; Palatnik et al., 2003).
Computational approaches for finding messages controlled by miRNAs indicate that these examples represent a very small fraction of the total (Rhoades et al.,
2002; Enright et al., 2003; Lewis et al., 2003; Stark et
al., 2003).
This review highlights what has been learned about
miRNAs in the decade since the report of the lin-4 RNA
and its regulation of lin-14. The major topics discussed
are miRNA genomics, miRNA biogenesis, miRNA regulatory mechanisms, and the roles of miRNAs in gene regulatory pathways.
Genomics: The miRNA Genes
For seven years after the discovery of the lin-4 RNA, the
genomics of this type of tiny regulatory RNA appeared
simple: there was no evidence for lin-4-like RNAs beyond nematodes and no sign of any similar noncoding
RNAs within nematodes. This all changed upon the discovery that let-7, another gene in the C. elegans heterochronic pathway, encoded a second ⵑ22 nt regulatory
RNA. The let-7 RNA acts to promote the transition from
late-larval to adult cell fates in the same way that the
lin-4 RNA acts earlier in development to promote the
progression from the first larval stage to the second
(Reinhart et al., 2000; Slack et al., 2000). Furthermore,
homologs of the let-7 gene were soon identified in the
human and fly genomes, and let-7 RNA itself was detected in human, Drosophila, and eleven other bilateral
animals (Pasquinelli et al., 2000).
Because of their common roles in controlling the timing of developmental transitions, the lin-4 and let-7
RNAs were dubbed small temporal RNAs (stRNAs), with
anticipation that additional regulatory RNAs of this type
would be discovered (Pasquinelli et al., 2000). Indeed,
less than one year later, three labs cloning small RNAs
from flies, worms, and human cells reported a total of
over one hundred additional genes for tiny noncoding
RNAs, approximately 20 new genes in Drosophila, approximately 30 in human, and approximately 60 in
worms (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001;
Lee and Ambros, 2001). The RNA products of these
genes resembled the lin-4 and let-7 stRNAs in that they
were ⵑ22 nt endogenously expressed RNAs, potentially
processed from one arm of a stem loop precursor (Figure
1), and they were generally conserved in evolution—
some quite broadly, others only in more closely related
species such as C. elegans and C. briggsae. But unlike
lin-4 and let-7 RNAs, many of the newly identified ⵑ22
nt RNAs were not expressed in distinct stages of development and instead were more likely to be expressed
in particular cell types. Thus the term microRNA was
used to refer to the stRNAs and all the other tiny RNAs
with similar features but unknown functions (LagosQuintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001; Lee and Ambros,
2001). Intensified cloning efforts have revealed numer-

Cell
282

Figure 1. Examples of Metazoan miRNAs
Shown are predicted stem loops involving the
mature miRNAs (red) and flanking sequence.
The miRNAs* (blue) are also shown in cases
where they have been experimentally identified (Lim et al., 2003a).
(A) Predicted stem loops of the founding
miRNAs, lin-4 and let-7 RNAs (Lee et al., 1993;
Reinhart et al., 2000). The precise sequences
of the mature miRNAs were defined by cloning (Lau et al., 2001). Shown are the C. elegans stem loops, but close homologs of both
have been found in flies and mammals (Pasquinelli et al., 2000; Lagos-Quintana et al.,
2001, 2002).
(B) Examples of miRNAs from other metazoan
genes, mir-1, mir-34, and mir-124. Shown are
the C. elegans stem loops, but close homologs of these miRNAs have been found in flies
and mammals (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001,
2002; Lau et al., 2001; Lee and Ambros, 2001).
(C) Examples of miRNAs from plant genes,
MIR165a, MIR172a2, and JAW. Shown are
Arabidopsis stem loops, but close homologs
of these miRNAs have been found in rice and
other plants (Park et al., 2002; Reinhart et al.,
2002; Palatnik et al., 2003).

ous additional miRNA genes in mammals, fish, worms,
and flies (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002, 2003; Mourelatos
et al., 2002; Ambros et al., 2003b; Aravin et al., 2003;
Dostie et al., 2003; Houbaviy et al., 2003; Kim et al.,
2003; Lim et al., 2003a, 2003b; Michael et al., 2003). A
registry has been set up to catalog the miRNAs and
facilitate the naming of newly identified genes (GriffithsJones, 2004).
Like C. elegans lin-4 and let-7, most miRNA genes
come from regions of the genome quite distant from
previously annotated genes, implying that they derive
from independent transcription units (Lagos-Quintana
et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001; Lee and Ambros, 2001).
Nonetheless, a sizable minority (e.g., about a quarter of
the human miRNA genes) are in the introns of premRNAs. These are preferentially in the same orientation
as the predicted mRNAs, suggesting that most of these
miRNAs are not transcribed from their own promoters
but are instead processed from the introns, as seen also
for many snoRNAs (Aravin et al., 2003; Lagos-Quintana
et al., 2003; Lai et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2003a). This
arrangement provides a convenient mechanism for the
coordinated expression of a miRNA and a protein. Regu-

latory scenarios are easy to imagine in which such coordinate expression could be useful, which would explain
the conserved relationships between miRNAs and host
mRNAs. A striking example of this conservation involves
mir-7, found in the intron of hnRNP K in both insects
and mammals (Aravin et al., 2003).
Other miRNA genes are clustered in the genome with
an arrangement and expression pattern implying transcription as a multi-cistronic primary transcript (LagosQuintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001). Although the
majority of worm and human miRNA genes are isolated
and not clustered (Lim et al., 2003a, 2003b), over half
of the known Drosophila miRNAs are clustered (Aravin
et al., 2003). The miRNAs within a genomic cluster are
often, though not always, related to each other; and
related miRNAs are sometimes but not always clustered
(Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001). Orthologs
of C. elegans lin-4 and let-7 are clustered in the fly and
human genomes and are coexpressed, sometimes from
the same primary transcript, leading to the idea that the
genomic separation of lin-4 from let-7 in nematodes
might be unique to the worm lineage (Aravin et al., 2003;
Bashirullah et al., 2003; Sempere et al., 2003). This exam-

Review
283

ple illustrates the possibility that even in cases where
clustered genes have no apparent sequence homology,
they may share functional relationships.
Some of the more interesting genomic locations of
miRNA genes include those in the Hox clusters. The
mir-10 gene lies in the Antennapedia complex of insects
and in the orthologous locations in two Hox clusters of
mammals, whereas the mir-iab-4 gene is within the insect Bithorax cluster (Aravin et al., 2003; LagosQuintana et al., 2003). In light of the roles of other genes
of the Hox clusters, the Hox miRNAs are especially good
candidates for having interesting functions in animal
development. Other interesting loci include the mir-15amir-16 cluster, which falls within a region of human chromosome 13 thought to harbor a tumor suppressor gene
because it is the site of the most common structural
aberrations in both mantle cell lymphoma and B cell
chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Lagos-Quintana et al.,
2001; Calin et al., 2002).
Nearly all of the cloned miRNAs are conserved in
closely related animals, such as human and mouse, or
C. elegans and C. briggsae (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2003;
Lim et al., 2003a, 2003b). This statement remains true
even when ignoring evolutionary conservation as a criterion for classifying clones as miRNAs. Many are also
conserved more broadly among the animal lineages
(Ambros et al., 2003b; Aravin et al., 2003; LagosQuintana et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2003a). For instance,
more than a third of the C. elegans miRNAs have easily
recognized homologs among the human miRNAs (Lim
et al., 2003a). When comparing distant lineages, considerable expansion or contraction of gene families is apparent, the most striking example being the let-7 family,
which has four identified members in C. elegans and at
least 15 in human, but only one in Drosophila (Pasquinelli
et al., 2000; Aravin et al., 2003; Lai et al., 2003; Lim et
al., 2003a).
Genomics: miRNA Expression
Many miRNAs have intriguing expression patterns. For
example, paralogs and orthologs of the C. elegans lin-4
and let-7 RNAs have stage-specific expression in development as if they, too, function as stRNAs (Pasquinelli
et al., 2000; Lau et al., 2001; Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002;
Bashirullah et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2003a). Other interesting examples include miR-1, which is primarily found in
the mammalian heart (Lee and Ambros, 2001; LagosQuintana et al., 2002); miR-122, which is primarily in the
liver (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002); miR-223, which is
primarily in the granulocytes and macrophages of
mouse bone marrow (Chen et al., 2004); miRNAs of the
mir-35–mir-42 cluster, which are preferentially in the C.
elegans embryo (Lau et al., 2001); and those of the mir290–mir-295 cluster, which are expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells but not in differentiated cells (Houbaviy et al., 2003). Expression array technology has been
adapted to examine miRNAs and has revealed distinct
expression patterns in different developmental stages
or regions of the mammalian brain (Krichevsky et al.,
2003). With all the different genes and expression patterns, it is reasonable to propose that every metazoan
cell type at each developmental stage might have a
distinct miRNA expression profile—providing ample op-

portunity for “micromanaging” the output of the transcriptome.
Another remarkable aspect of miRNA expression is
the sheer abundance of certain miRNAs in the cells. For
example, miR-2, miR-52, and miR-58 are each present
on average at more than 50,000 molecules per adult
worm cell—a greater abundance than the U6 snRNA of
the spliceosome (Lim et al., 2003a). Whether this high
expression is attributable to very robust transcription
or to slow decay is not yet known. Some miRNAs are
expressed at much lower levels. For instance, miR-124
is present in the adult worm on average at 800 molecules
per cell (Lim et al., 2003a). This lower average level
(though still higher than that of the typical mRNA) might
be due to low expression in many cells or high expression in just a few cells. The finding that the mouse ortholog of miR-124 is nearly exclusively expressed in the
brain supports the latter explanation (Lagos-Quintana
et al., 2002).
Genomics: Computational Approaches
and Gene Number
There has been some speculation as to why miRNAs
were not discovered earlier; the answer is clearly not that
they are rare. MicroRNAs and their associated proteins
appear to be one of the more abundant ribonucleoprotein complexes in the cell. Nonetheless, miRNAs whose
expression is restricted to nonabundant cell types or
specific environmental conditions could still be missed
in cloning efforts. Thus, computational approaches have
been developed to complement experimental approaches to miRNA gene identification. From early on,
homology searches have revealed orthologs and paralogs of known miRNA genes (Pasquinelli et al., 2000;
Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001; Lee and
Ambros, 2001). Another simple approach has been to
search the vicinity of known miRNA genes for other
stem loops that might represent additional genes of a
genomic cluster (Lau et al., 2001; Aravin et al., 2003;
Seitz et al., 2003; Ohler et al., 2004). This strategy is
important because some of the most rapidly evolving
miRNA genes are present as tandem arrays within operon-like clusters, and the divergent sequences of these
genes make them relatively difficult to spot using the
more general approaches.
Gene-finding approaches that do not depend on homology or proximity to known genes have also been
developed and applied to entire genomes (Ambros et al.,
2003b; Grad et al., 2003; Lai et al., 2003; Lim et al.,
2003a). They typically start by identifying conserved genomic segments that both fall outside of predicted protein-coding regions and potentially could form stem
loops and then score these candidate miRNA stem loops
for the patterns of conservation and pairing that characterize known miRNAs genes. So far, the two most sensitive computational scoring tools are MiRscan, which has
been systematically applied to nematode and vertebrate
candidates (Lim et al., 2003a, 2003b), and miRseeker,
which has been systematically applied to insect candidates (Lai et al., 2003). Both MiRscan and miRseeker
have identified dozens of genes that were subsequently
(or concurrently) verified experimentally. Because of
their relatively high sensitivity, MiRscan and miRseeker

Cell
284

have also enabled reasonably firm estimates of the number of miRNA genes in the genomes of human (200–255
miRNA genes; Lim et al., 2003b), C. elegans (103–120
genes; Lim et al., 2003a; Ohler et al., 2004), and Drosophila (96–124 genes; Lai et al., 2003). In each species, these
numbers represent nearly 1% of the predicted genes in
the genome, a fraction similar to that of other large gene
families with regulatory roles, such as the homeodomain
transcription-factor family.
These estimates imply that the majority of miRNA
genes have now been found in the mammalian and nematode lineages—particularly in C. elegans, where approximately 100 miRNA genes have been identified.
(This tally is conservative in that it excludes some reported genes that appear to be questionable [Ohler et
al., 2004].) In Drosophila, 77 genes, representing 71
unique miRNAs, have been reliably identified (Aravin et
al., 2003; Lai et al., 2003), and in humans, approximately
175 genes, representing approximately 145 unique
miRNAs, have either been validated in human cells or
identified based on their homology to genes validated
in mouse or zebrafish (miRNA Registry, release 3.0; Griffiths-Jones, 2004). When considering the number of
miRNAs remaining to be identified or validated in these
species, it is important to remember that gene number
estimates by MiRscan and miRseeker rest on the assumption that the stem loops of the rare, difficult-toclone miRNAs will show patterns of conservation and
pairing resembling those of the abundant, easily cloned
miRNAs. This assumption appears to hold for C. elegans, for which there was a reassuring lack of correlation
between the number of times an miRNA was cloned and
its MiRscan score (Lim et al., 2003a).
If instead a disproportionate number of difficult-toclone miRNAs are also difficult to identify computationally, then estimates of the number of miRNA genes in
the genome will be too low. This might be the situation
in humans—perhaps because the vertebrate genomes
used in the analysis are more highly diverged. Most of
the first 109 miRNAs cloned from mammals have readily
identifiable homologs in the genome of pufferfish (Fugu
ripens), which enabled MiRscan analysis to identify 81
(74%) of these genes by scoring stem loops conserved
in human, mouse, and fish (Lim et al., 2003b). Extrapolating from this sensitivity and the number of additional
candidates with scores matching the known miRNAs,
an upper bound on the number of human miRNA genes
was calculated to be 255 (Lim et al., 2003b). However,
more recently identified mammalian miRNA genes appear relatively less likely to be conserved in fish, particularly those genes cloned from embryonic stem cells and
mammalian brain and the 14 miRNA candidates residing
in a large imprinted cluster (Houbaviy et al., 2003; Kim
et al., 2003; Seitz et al., 2003). These recent data suggest
that the more difficult-to-clone mammalian miRNAs are
less likely to be conserved in fish and thus less likely to
have been identified computationally, which implies that
a confident upper bound on the number of human genes
is difficult to determine using analyses that extended
to fish and that 255 is too low a value for this upper
bound—although it still might exceed the actual number
of human miRNA genes.

Genomics: miRNAs in Plants
Cloning of small RNAs from plants has also revealed
miRNAs, although the multitude of other 21 to 24 nt
RNAs found in plants sometimes complicated their initial
classification (Llave et al., 2002a; Mette et al., 2002; Park
et al., 2002; Reinhart et al., 2002). Like the metazoan
miRNAs, the plant miRNAs (1) are endogenously expressed ⵑ22 nt RNAs potentially processed from one
arm of foldback precursors, (2) are generally conserved
in evolution, and (3) come from regions of the genome
distinct from previously annotated genes (Reinhart et
al., 2002). To date, 20 unique Arabidopsis miRNAs have
been reported; a few are closely related to each other,
and thus the reported genes represent 15 distinct miRNA
families. (Bartel and Bartel, 2003; Palatnik et al., 2003).
Because some could be derived from multiple genomic
loci, the 20 miRNAs could represent more than 40 Arabidopsis genes. The homology searches based on the
cloned genes also reveal numerous potential paralogs
with a point substitution or two in the predicted miRNA.
Additional gene families are likely to be found when the
cloning of small plant RNAs is scaled up and computational gene-finding methods are extended to plants. It
appears that, as in animals, a substantial fraction of the
gene regulatory molecules in plants could be RNA rather
than protein.
The discovery of miRNAs in both plants and animals
suggests that this class of noncoding RNAs has been
modulating gene expression since at least the last common ancestor of these lineages (Reinhart et al., 2002).
Nonetheless, plant and animal miRNAs differ in some
aspects, which appear to be related to differences in
their biogenesis. The most notable differences are in
the miRNA stem loops; the plant predicted foldbacks
are much more variable in size and typically larger than
those of animals (Figure 1; for a more comprehensive
look at plant miRNA predicted stem loops, see online
supplemental material of Reinhart et al., 2002). More
subtle differences include somewhat more pairing between the miRNA and the other arm of the stem loop in
plants compared to animals, a tighter distribution of
plant miRNA lengths that centers on 21 nt rather than
the 22–23 nt lengths most often seen in animals, and
perhaps a stronger preference for a U at the 5⬘ terminus
of the plant miRNAs (Lau et al., 2001; Reinhart et al.,
2002; Bartel and Bartel, 2003). These differences, together with the absence of reports that particular miRNA
genes are conserved between plants and animals, leave
open the prospect that miRNA genes arose independently in each of these multicellular lineages, after their
last common ancestor (which is thought to have been
unicellular). Even in this scenario of dual origins, the
presence of miRNAs in all plant and animal species
examined thus far suggests early origins in both lineages, perhaps preceding and facilitating the developmental patterning needed for multicellular body plans.
Biogenesis: miRNA Transcription
A 693 bp genomic fragment rescues the lin-4 deficiency,
implying that all the elements required for the regulation
and initiation of transcription are located in this short
fragment (Lee et al., 1993). However, little is known regarding these transcriptional processes for lin-4 or any

Review
285

other miRNA gene. Some miRNAs residing in introns
are likely to share their regulatory elements and primary
transcript with their pre-mRNA host genes. For the remaining miRNA genes, presumably transcribed from
their own promoters, no primary transcripts have been
fully defined. Nonetheless, these primary miRNA transcripts, called pri-miRNAs (Lee et al., 2002), are generally thought to be much longer than the conserved stem
loops currently used to define miRNA genes, as suggested by the following: (1) the idea that clustered
miRNA stem loops are transcribed from a single primary
transcript (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001),
(2) matches between miRNAs and lengthy ESTs in the
databases (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002; Aukerman and
Sakai, 2003), (3) RT-PCR experiments amplifying large
fragments of the pri-miRNAs (Lee et al., 2002; Aravin et
al., 2003).
The two candidate RNA polymerases for pri-miRNA
transcription are pol II and pol III. Pol II produces the
mRNAs and some noncoding RNAs, including the small
nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) and four of the small nuclear
RNAs (snRNAs) of the spliceosome, whereas pol III produces some of the shorter noncoding RNAs, including
tRNAs, 5S ribosomal RNA, and the U6 snRNA. The
miRNAs processed from the introns of protein-coding
host genes are undoubtedly transcribed by pol II. The
following observations provide indirect evidence that
many of the other miRNAs also are pol II products, even
though most of the metazoan miRNA genes do not have
the classical signals for polyadenylylation (Ohler et al.,
2004): (1) The pri-miRNAs can be quite long, more than
one 1 kb, which is longer than typical pol III transcripts.
(2) These presumed pri-miRNAs often have internal runs
of uridine residues, which would be expected to prematurely terminate pol III transcription. (3) Many miRNAs
are differentially expressed during development, as is
observed often for pol II but not pol III products. (4)
Fusions that place the open reading frame of a reporter
protein downstream from the 5⬘ portion of miRNA genes
lead to robust reporter protein expression, suggesting
that miRNA primary transcripts are capped pol II transcripts. Examples of such fusions include artificial reporter constructs designed to investigate the regulation
of miRNA expression (Johnson et al., 2003; Johnston
and Hobert, 2003) and a natural chromosome translocation linked to an aggressive B cell leukemia, in which a
truncated MYC gene is fused to the 5⬘ portion of mir142 (Gauwerky et al., 1989; Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002).
Although these observations indicate that many miRNAs
are pol II transcripts, others might still be pol III transcripts, just as most but not all snRNAs are pol II products. Ectopic expression of miR-142 and other miRNAs
from a pol III promoter produces efficiently and precisely
processed miRNAs that function in vivo (Chen et al.,
2004), indicating that there is no obligate link between
the identity of the polymerase and downstream miRNA
processing or function.
Biogenesis: miRNA Maturation
The current model for maturation of the mammalian
miRNAs is shown in Figure 2B. The first step is the
nuclear cleavage of the pri-miRNA, which liberates a
ⵑ60–70 nt stem loop intermediate, known as the miRNA

precursor, or the pre-miRNA (Lee et al., 2002; Zeng and
Cullen, 2003). This processing is performed by the
Drosha RNase III endonuclease, which cleaves both
strands of the stem at sites near the base of the primary
stem loop (Lee et al., 2003) (Figure 2B, step 2). Drosha
cleaves the RNA duplex with a staggered cut typical of
RNase III endonucleases, and thus the base of the premiRNA stem loop has a 5⬘ phosphate and ⵑ2 nt 3⬘
overhang (Basyuk et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2003). This
pre-miRNA is actively transported from the nucleus to
the cytoplasm by Ran-GTP and the export receptor Exportin-5 (Yi et al., 2003; Lund et al., 2004) (Figure 2B,
step 3).
The nuclear cut by Drosha defines one end of the
mature miRNA. The other end is processed in the cytoplasm by the enzyme Dicer (Lee et al., 2003). Dicer, also
an RNase III endonuclease, was first recognized for its
role in generating the small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
that mediate RNA interference (RNAi) (Bernstein et al.,
2001) and was later shown to play a role in miRNA maturation (Grishok et al., 2001; Hutvágner et al., 2001; Ketting et al., 2001). According to the current model of
miRNA maturation, Dicer performs an activity in metazoan miRNA maturation similar to that which it performs
when chopping up double-stranded RNA during RNAi:
It first recognizes the double-stranded portion of the
pre-miRNA, perhaps with particular affinity for a 5⬘ phosphate and 3⬘ overhang at the base of the stem loop.
Then, at about two helical turns away from the base of
the stem loop, it cuts both strands of the duplex. This
cleavage by Dicer lops off the terminal base pairs and
loop of the pre-miRNA, leaving the 5⬘ phosphate and ⵑ2
nt 3⬘ overhang characteristic of an RNase III and producing an siRNA-like imperfect duplex that comprises the
mature miRNA and similar-sized fragment derived from
the opposing arm of the pre-miRNA (Figure 2B, step 4).
The fragments from the opposing arm, called the
miRNA* sequences (Lau et al., 2001), are found in libraries of cloned miRNAs but typically at much lower frequency than are the miRNAs (Lagos-Quintana et al.,
2002; Aravin et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2003a). For example,
in an effort that identified over 3400 clones representing
80 C. elegans miRNAs, only 38 clones representing 14
miRNAs* were found (Lim et al., 2003a). This approximately 100-fold difference in cloning frequency indicates that the miRNA:miRNA* duplex is generally shortlived compared to the miRNA single strand.
According to the current model, the specificity of the
initial cleavage mediated by Drosha determines the correct register of cleavage within the miRNA precursor
and thus defines both mature ends of the miRNA (Lee
et al., 2003). This idea that Drosha, not Dicer, imparts
the specificity is appealing because studies have shown
that generic double-stranded RNA is refractory to
Drosha cleavage and that Dicer progressively chops
up an RNA double strand, irrespective of its sequence
(Zamore et al., 2000; Bernstein et al., 2001; Elbashir et al.,
2001a; Zhang et al., 2002). The determinants of Drosha
recognition are largely undefined but include the secondary structure at the base of the primary stem loop
as well as some elements flanking the stem loop but
generally within 125 nt of the miRNA (Lee et al., 2003;
Chen et al., 2004).
This stepwise scenario for miRNA maturation is based

Cell
286

Figure 2. The Biogenesis of miRNAs and siRNAs
(A) The biogenesis of a plant miRNA (steps 1–6; see text for details) and its hetero-silencing of loci unrelated to that from which it originated
(step 7). The pre-miRNA intermediates (bracketed), thought to be very short-lived, have not been isolated in plants. The miRNA (red) is
incorporated into the RISC (step 6), whereas the miRNA* (blue) is degraded (hatched segment). A monophosphate (P) marks the 5⬘ terminus
of each fragment.
(B) The biogenesis of a metazoan miRNA (steps 1–6; see text for details) and its hetero-silencing of loci unrelated to that from which it
originated (step 7).
(C) The biogenesis of animal siRNAs (steps 1–6; see text for details) and their auto-silencing of the same (or similar) loci from which they
originated (step 7).

primarily on the investigation of mammalian Drosha and
Dicer function (Lee et al., 2002, 2003). The notion that
it applies to other metazoan species is supported by
the identity of the long form of the C. elegans lin-4 RNA,
which appears to be an excellent match (within the resolution of nuclease mapping) to that expected for the
lin-4 pre-miRNA (Lee et al., 1993). Furthermore, presumed pre-miRNAs for numerous miRNAs can be detected on Northern blots, and when examined in the
context of reduced Dicer activity, these pre-miRNAs
invariably increase in abundance, as would be expected
if Dicer was responsible for their processing (Grishok et
al., 2001; Hutvágner et al., 2001; Ketting et al., 2001; Lee
and Ambros, 2001; Lim et al., 2003a). Finally, the general
existence of the miRNA:miRNA* duplex is supported by
the cloning of numerous miRNAs* in nematodes and
flies, although for most miRNA genes, an experimentally
identified miRNA* has not yet been reported.
The cloning of a few miRNAs* in plants also points to
a transient miRNA:miRNA* duplex (Reinhart et al., 2002).

However, the biogenesis of this duplex appears to differ
in plants (Figure 2A). Most notably, pre-miRNAs have
not been compellingly detected in plants—not even in
plants with crippled DCL1, a Dicer-like protein known
to assist in miRNA maturation (Reinhart et al., 2002).
The lack of pre-miRNA in these dcl1-9 plants (formerly
known as caf-1 plants), together with the apparent nuclear localization of the DCL1 protein (Papp et al., 2003),
suggests that DCL1 provides the Drosha functionality
in plants, making the first cut that sets the register for
miRNA maturation (Figure 2A, step 2). DCL1 (or another
enzyme yet to be identified) then makes the second cut,
which corresponds to metazoan Dicer cleavage, before
the miRNA leaves the nucleus (Figure 2A, step 3). A
coupled second cut in the nucleus would explain why
pre-miRNA-like RNAs do not accumulate to detectable
levels in plants. It would also explain why ectopic nuclear
but not cytoplasmic expression of P19, a plant viral
protein that inhibits silencing by sequestering siRNA
duplexes, prevents miRNA accumulation (Papp et al.,

Review
287

2003). Perhaps HASTY, the plant ortholog of Exportin-5,
is responsible for exporting the miRNA:miRNA* duplex
from the nucleus, which would explain the pleiotropic
developmental phenotypes of hasty mutants (Bollman
et al., 2003; Yi et al., 2003; Lund et al., 2004) (Figure 2A,
step 4).
Biogenesis: RISC Assembly
Following cleavage and nucleocytoplasmic export, the
miRNA pathway of plants and animals appears to be
biochemically indistinguishable from the central steps
of RNA silencing pathways known as posttranscriptional
gene silencing (PTGS) in plants, quelling in fungi, and
RNAi in animals. Indeed, understanding miRNA biogenesis and function has been greatly facilitated by analogy
and contrast to the siRNAs of RNAi, and vice versa. In
light of these biochemical connections, the discovery
of lin-4 and its regulation of lin-14 can be considered in
hindsight as the first characterization of an RNAi-like
phenomenon in animals.
To illustrate the commonality between miRNAs and
siRNAs, the RNAi pathway is briefly outlined here (and
depicted in Figure 2C). The pathway begins with long
double-stranded RNA, either a bimolecular duplex or an
extended hairpin, that either is artificially introduced into
the cell or animal during a gene knockdown experiment
(Fire et al., 1998) or is naturally generated—from sense
and antisense genomic transcripts, or perhaps from the
activity of a cellular RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(found in plants, fungi, and nematodes, but not flies
or mammals) or as an intermediate of viral replication
(Cogoni and Macino, 1999; Ketting et al., 1999; Dalmay
et al., 2000; Mourrain et al., 2000; Smardon et al., 2000;
Aravin et al., 2001, 2003; Li et al., 2002). The doublestranded RNA is processed by Dicer into many ⵑ22 nt
siRNAs (Hamilton and Baulcombe, 1999; Hammond et
al., 2000; Parrish et al., 2000; Zamore et al., 2000; Grishok
et al., 2001; Ketting et al., 2001; Knight and Bass, 2001)
(Figure 2C, steps 2–4). Although these siRNAs are initially short double-stranded species with 5⬘ phosphates
and 2 nt 3⬘ overhangs characteristic of RNase III cleavage products, they eventually become incorporated as
single-stranded RNAs into a ribonucleoprotein complex,
known as the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC)
(Hammond et al., 2000; Elbashir et al., 2001a, 2001b;
Nykänen et al., 2001; Martinez et al., 2002; Schwarz et
al., 2002) (Figure 2C, step 6). The RISC identifies target
messages based on perfect (or nearly perfect) complementarity between the siRNA and the mRNA, and then
the endonuclease of the RISC cleaves the mRNA at
a site near the middle of the siRNA complementarity,
measuring from the 5⬘ end of the siRNA and cutting
between the nucleotides pairing to residues 10 and 11
of the siRNA (Elbashir et al., 2001a, 2001b). Similar pathways have been proposed for gene silencing in plants
and fungi (Hamilton and Baulcombe, 1999; Vance and
Vaucheret, 2001; Pickford et al., 2002).
The RISC has been purified from fly and human cells
and in both cases contains a member of the Argonaute
protein family, which is thought to be a core component
of the complex (Hammond et al., 2001; Hutvágner and
Zamore, 2002; Martinez et al., 2002). This fits nicely with
previous genetic data showing that Argonaute proteins

RDE-1, QDE2, and AGO1 are crucial for RNAi and analogous processes in worms, fungi, and plants, respectively
(Tabara et al., 1999; Catalanotto et al., 2000; Fagard et
al., 2000). Argonaute and its homologs are approximately 100 kDa proteins that are sometimes called PPD
proteins because they all share the PAZ and PIWI domains (Cerutti et al., 2000). The PAZ domain (first recognized in Piwi, Argonaute, and Zwille/Pinhead proteins)
has a stable fold when isolated from the rest of the
protein, which has a ␤ barrel core that together with
a side appendage appears to bind weakly to singlestranded RNAs at least 5 nt in length and also to doublestranded RNA (Lingel et al., 2003; Song et al., 2003; Yan
et al., 2003). This dual binding ability suggests that the
Argonaute protein could be directly associated with the
siRNA before and after it recognizes the mRNA target.
Other RISC-associated proteins include the suspected RNA binding proteins VIG and Fragile X-related
protein and the nuclease Tudor-SN, none of which have
defined roles in the RISC (Caudy et al., 2002, 2003;
Ishizuka et al., 2002). These proteins do not copurify
with RISC in all purification schemes and their stoichiometry in RISC has not been established. Perhaps they
are also core components of the RISC that do not remain
associated during some purification methods. Alternatively, they could be accessory factors that modify the
specificity or function of the core complex. The notion
that RISC comes in different subtypes is already supported by the number of Argonaute family members
found in different species, ranging up to 24 in C. elegans,
and the preferential genetic or biochemical association
of different family members with different types of silencing RNAs (Grishok et al., 2001; Caudy et al., 2002;
Zilberman et al., 2003). The RISC endonuclease, known
as Slicer, has not been identified, suggesting that it
might be present in sub-stoichiometric amounts and
only recruited after the other components of RISC have
found a suitable match to the siRNA. Another possibility
is that one of the identified RISC components provides
the Slicer activity by means of an unrecognized
nuclease domain.
MicroRNAs were first reported to reside in the miRNA
ribonucleoprotein complex (miRNP), which in humans
includes the proteins eIF2C2, the helicase Gemin3, and
Gemin4 (Mourelatos et al., 2002). eIF2C2 is a human
Argonaute homolog and was later found to be a constituent of the human siRNA-programmed RISC (Martinez
et al., 2002). Furthermore, the human let-7 miRNA is
associated with eIF2C2 and capable of specifying cleavage of an artificial target with perfect complementarity
to the miRNA (Hutvágner and Zamore, 2002). Thus, the
miRNP possesses the salient properties that define the
RISC (Hutvágner and Zamore, 2002), and although it
might later be shown to represent a particular subtype
of RISC, it is referred to as a RISC in this review. This
perspective is further supported by the demonstration
that plant miRNAs can direct cleavage of their natural
targets (Llave et al., 2002b; Tang et al., 2003) and that
siRNAs originally designed to specify cleavage can also
mediate translational repression (Doench et al., 2003;
Zeng et al., 2003).
When the miRNA strand of the miRNA:miRNA* duplex
is loaded into the RISC, the miRNA* appears to be
peeled away and degraded. What then is the mechanism

Cell
288

Figure 3. The Actions of Small Silencing RNAs
(A) Messenger RNA cleavage specified by a miRNA or siRNA. Black arrowhead indicates site of cleavage.
(B) Translational repression specified by miRNAs or siRNAs.
(C) Transcriptional silencing, thought to be specified by heterochromatic siRNAs.

for choosing which of the two strands enters the RISC?
The answer largely lies in the relative stability of the two
ends of the duplex: for both siRNA and miRNA duplexes,
the strand that enters the RISC is nearly always the one
whose 5⬘ end is less tightly paired (Khvorova et al., 2003;
Schwarz et al., 2003). This observation suggests that a
helicase-like enzyme (yet to be identified) samples the
ends of the duplex multiple times—usually releasing the
end before beginning to productively unwind the duplex
but occasionally unwinding the duplex, resulting in a
strong bias for productive unwinding at the easier end
(Khvorova et al., 2003; Schwarz et al., 2003) (Figures
2A–2C, steps 5). This elegant rule for predicting which
strand of the duplex will enter the RISC was initially
formulated based on observations and experiments in
animal systems, but it also applies to plant siRNAs
(Khvorova et al., 2003) and plant miRNAs. Its predictive
value for the vast majority of plant and animal miRNAs
strongly implies the existence of the miRNA:miRNA* duplex as a transient intermediate in the biogenesis of all
miRNAs, even those for which a miRNA* has not yet
been cloned. For a few vertebrate and insect genes, both
strands of the miRNA duplex accumulate at frequencies
suggesting that both enter the RISC, raising the prospect that either or both might be functional (LagosQuintana et al., 2002; Krichevsky et al., 2003; Schwarz
et al., 2003). These rare cases can be reconciled with
the asymmetric loading of the RISC because the ends
of these duplexes have nearly equivalent stabilities at
their ends; for each RISC assembled, the helicase loads
only one strand of each duplex but chooses each strand
with similar frequency (Schwarz et al., 2003).
Mechanism: mRNA Cleavage
MicroRNAs can direct the RISC to downregulate gene
expression by either of two posttranscriptional mechanisms: mRNA cleavage or translational repression (Figures 3A and 3B). According to the prevailing model, the
choice of posttranscriptional mechanisms is not determined by whether the small silencing RNA originated
as an siRNA or a miRNA but instead is determined by
the identity of the target: Once incorporated into a cytoplasmic RISC, the miRNA will specify cleavage if the
mRNA has sufficient complementarity to the miRNA, or
it will repress productive translation if the mRNA does
not have sufficient complementarity to be cleaved but
does have a suitable constellation of miRNA complementary sites (Hutvágner and Zamore, 2002; Zeng et
al., 2002, 2003; Doench et al., 2003). Although this model

is generally supported by experimental tests, highly
functional siRNAs and metazoan miRNAs have sequence-composition differences centering at positions
12 and 13, which might point to inherent differential
sequence preferences for the two respective modes of
repression (Khvorova et al., 2003). Furthermore, a perplexing observation has come from the study of a plant
miRNA, miR172, which appears to regulate APETALA2
via translational repression despite the near-perfect
complementarity between the miRNA and its single
complementary site in the APETALA2 ORF (Aukerman
and Sakai, 2003; Chen, 2003).
When a miRNA guides cleavage, the cut is at precisely
the same site as that seen for siRNA-guided cleavage,
i.e., between the nucleotides pairing to residues 10 and
11 of the miRNA (Elbashir et al., 2001a; Hutvágner and
Zamore, 2002; Llave et al., 2002b; Kasschau et al., 2003).
The register of cleavage does not change when the
miRNA is not perfectly paired to the target at its 5⬘
terminus (Kasschau et al., 2003; Palatnik et al., 2003).
Therefore, the cut site appears to be determined relative
to miRNA residues, not miRNA:target base pairs. After
cleavage of the mRNA, the miRNA remains intact and
can guide the recognition and destruction of additional
messages (Hutvágner and Zamore, 2002; Tang et al.,
2003).
Mechanism: Translational Repression
From the beginning, it was proposed that lin-4 RNA
specifies the translational repression of C. elegans lin14 mRNA. This is the simplest interpretation of the observation that lin-4 RNA expression coincides with a
drop in LIN-14 protein without a change in lin-14 mRNA
(Wightman et al., 1993). The surprise came later, when
it was shown that the polysome profile of lin-14 mRNA
at the first larval stage is indistinguishable from that
at later larval stages, when LIN-14 protein levels have
dropped (Olsen and Ambros, 1999). The same is true
for lin-28 mRNA, another message targeted by lin-4 RNA
(Seggerson et al., 2002). Two possibilities were put forward to explain these results (Olsen and Ambros, 1999).
The lin-4 RNA might repress translation at a step after
translation initiation, in a manner that does not perceivably alter the density of the ribosomes on the message,
e.g., by the slowing or stalling of all the ribosomes on
the message. An alternative possibility is that translation
continues at the same rate but is nonproductive because
the newly synthesized polypeptide is specifically degraded. In this review, both of these mechanistic possi-

Review
289

bilities are lumped together as translational repression,
as is common practice, even though in the second possibility polypeptide synthesis per se is not repressed. A
better mechanistic understanding of lin-4-specified
translational repression awaits the development of an
in vitro system that faithfully recapitulates lin-4 regulation of its targets.
Extending the analysis of polysome profiles beyond
C. elegans lin-4 regulation will be important for learning
whether the postinitiation mechanism applies more generally to translational repression mediated by other
miRNAs. Indeed, evidence for translational repression
of any metazoan miRNA targets other than those of lin-4
is scant because the fate of the messenger RNA during
miRNA-mediated regulation has not yet been monitored
for these non-lin-4 targets. Nonetheless, several indirect
lines of evidence support the notion that metazoan
miRNAs other than lin-4 RNA typically mediate translational repression rather than mRNA cleavage: First,
other metazoan miRNAs, as well as siRNAs, can repress
the expression of heterologous reporter transcripts
without decreasing mRNA levels, if these messages
contain either the natural miRNA complementary sites
from the miRNA target (Brennecke et al., 2003) or multiple artificial complementary sites that have bulges or
mismatches at their center when paired to the miRNA,
such that the pattern of base pairing resembles that
found between the let-7 RNA and its natural complementary sites in the C. elegans, lin-41 3⬘ UTR (Zeng et al.,
2002, 2003; Doench et al., 2003). Second, the let-7-programmed RISC endogenous to human cells does not
cleave an RNA fragment containing the let-7 complementary sites found in C. elegans lin-41 (Hutvágner and
Zamore, 2002). Third, there is a difference between
plants and animals with regard to the extent of complementarity between the miRNAs and mRNAs (Rhoades
et al., 2002). Because near-perfect complementarity is
thought to be required for RISC-mediated cleavage but
not translational repression, the lower degree of complementarity seen in animals suggests that translational
repression is more prevalent in animals than in plants.
Nonetheless, it would be premature to conclude that
more metazoan miRNA regulatory targets are translationally inhibited than are cleaved. Surprisingly little
complementarity appears to be needed to specify detectable RISC-mediated cleavage in mammalian cells
(Jackson et al., 2003), suggesting that it will not be long
before natural examples of miRNA-directed mRNA
cleavage will be reported in animals.
The cooperative action of multiple RISCs appears
to provide the most efficient translational inhibition
(Doench et al., 2003). This explains the presence of multiple miRNA complementary sites in most genetically
identified targets of metazoan miRNAs (Lee et al., 1993;
Wightman et al., 1993; Reinhart et al., 2000; Abrahante et
al., 2003; Lin et al., 2003). The computationally identified
metazoan targets also have multiple sites, but this pattern is uninformative because the presence of multiple
sites was a criterion for their identification (Brennecke
et al., 2003; Lewis et al., 2003; Stark et al., 2003). Although only a small fraction of the miRNA-mRNA regulatory pairs are known in any animal, there are already
instances in which different miRNA species have been
proposed to regulate the same targets (Reinhart et al.,

2000; Abrahante et al., 2003; Lin et al., 2003). These
examples, and the analogy to other biological regulatory
systems, most notably transcriptional regulation, have
led to the general expectation that as the list of known
metazoan miRNA:mRNA regulatory interactions becomes more comprehensive, combinatorial control will
be seen to be common, if not the norm.
The complementary sites for the known metazoan
targets reside in the 3⬘ UTRs. This bias might reflect a
mechanistic preference, perhaps enabling the bound
complexes to avoid the mRNA-clearing activity of the
ribosome. After all, numerous other examples of eukaryotic translation regulation are mediated through 3⬘ UTR
elements (Kuersten and Goodwin, 2003). Alternatively,
it might reflect a bias in the way that metazoan miRNA
targets and complementary sites are discovered: The
lin-4:lin-14 precedent might have directed subsequent
searches to the 3⬘ UTRs, and conserved complementary
sites are easier to distinguish in the UTRs, away from
the confounding sequence conservation of the ORFs.
The reported siRNA-mediated translational repression
from a single imperfect complementary site in the ORF
of a mammalian reporter construct (Saxena et al., 2003)
illustrates why it would be premature to conclude that
most metazoan miRNA regulation is mediated through
multiple complementary sites in the 3⬘ UTRs.
Among the dozens of miRNA-target relationships that
have been examined, there has been no evidence for
miRNAs directing upregulation of gene expression.
These findings are consistent with the idea that miRNAs
are all acting within a silencing complex, namely the
RISC. Even if miRNAs are limited to functioning within
RISC complexes, there is still the prospect that some
miRNAs might specify more than just posttranscriptional
repression; some might target DNA for transcriptional
silencing (Figure 3C). Argonaute proteins and siRNAs
are associated with DNA methylation and silencing in
plants (Mette et al., 2000; Hamilton et al., 2002; Zilberman et al., 2003), heterochromatin formation in fungi
(Hall et al., 2002; Reinhart and Bartel, 2002; Volpe et al.,
2002), and DNA rearrangements in ciliates (Mochizuki
et al., 2002). Each of these examples suggests the existence of a nuclear RISC-like complex. If miRNAs are not
involved in DNA silencing, it will be interesting to learn
how they avoid entering the nuclear RISC, particularly
in plants, where processing appears to be completed
in the nucleus.
Mechanism: Target Recognition
The importance of complementarity to the 5⬘ portion of
metazoan miRNAs has been suspected since the observation that the lin-14 UTR has “core elements” of complementarity to the 5⬘ region of the lin-4 miRNA (Wightman et al., 1993). More recent observations support this
idea: (1) Residues 2–8 of several invertebrate miRNAs
are perfectly complementary to 3⬘ UTR elements previously shown to mediate posttranscriptional repression
(Lai, 2002). (2) Within the miRNA complementary sites
of the first validated targets of invertebrate miRNAs,
mRNA residues that pair (sometimes imperfectly) to residues 2–8 of the miRNA are perfectly conserved in orthologous messages of other species, and a contiguous
helix of at least six basepairs is nearly always seen in

Cell
290

this region (Stark et al., 2003). (3) Residues 2–8 of the
miRNA are the most conserved among homologous
metazoan miRNAs (Lewis et al., 2003; Lim et al., 2003a).
(4) When predicting targets of mammalian miRNAs, requiring perfect pairing to the heptamer spanning residues 2–8 of the miRNA is much more productive than
is requiring pairing to any other heptamer of the miRNA
(Lewis et al., 2003). Pairing to this 5⬘ core region also
appears to disproportionally govern the specificity of
siRNA-mediated mRNA cleavage (Jackson et al., 2003;
Pusch et al., 2003), and the same is true for a plant
miRNA that mediates mRNA cleavage (Reinhart, Mallory, Tang, Zamore, Barton, D.B., unpublished).
Why is complementarity to the 5⬘ end of the small
RNA universally important, regardless of the mechanism
of gene regulation? One possibility is that the RISC presents only this core region to nucleate pairing to the
mRNAs. Presentation of these ⵑ7 nucleotides prearranged in the geometry of an A-form helix would preferentially enhance the affinity with matched mRNA segments. Presentation of a preformed helical segment of
this length would be a reasonable compromise between
the topological difficulties associated with longer prearranged helical geometry and the drop in initial binding
specificity that would result from a shorter core. In this
scenario, mismatches with the core region inhibit initial
target recognition and thus prevent cleavage or translational repression regardless of the degree of complementarity elsewhere in the complementary site. If there
is sufficient additional pairing after the remainder of the
miRNA is allowed to participate, cleavage ensues. However, core pairing supplemented by just a few flanking
pairs appears to be sufficient to mediate translational
repression in cooperation with other RISCs bound to
the message (Lewis et al., 2003). Interestingly, the ability
of the Argonaute PAZ domain to bind both double- and
single-stranded RNAs (Lingel et al., 2003; Song et al.,
2003; Yan et al., 2003), mentioned earlier, would make
it a suitable candidate for presenting the core and stabilizing the core pairing.
Mechanism: Distinctions between miRNAs
and siRNAs
Because miRNAs and endogenous siRNAs have a
shared central biogenesis (Figures 2B and 2C, steps 4–6)
and can perform interchangeable biochemical functions
(Figures 3A and 3B), these two classes of silencing RNAs
cannot be distinguished by either their chemical composition or mechanism of action. Nonetheless, important
distinctions can be made, particularly in regard to their
origin, evolutionary conservation, and the types of genes
that they silence (Figured 2B and 2C, steps 1–3 and
7; Bartel and Bartel, 2003): First, miRNAs derive from
genomic loci distinct from other recognized genes,
whereas siRNAs often derive from mRNAs, transposons,
viruses, or heterochromatic DNA (Figure 2, steps 1).
Second, miRNAs are processed from transcripts that
can form local RNA hairpin structures, whereas siRNAs
are processed from long bimolecular RNA duplexes or
extended hairpins (Figure 2, steps 2). Third, a single
miRNA:miRNA* duplex is generated from each miRNA
hairpin precursor molecule, whereas a multitude of
siRNA duplexes are generated from each siRNA precur-

sor molecule, leading to many different siRNAs accumulating from both strands of this extended dsRNA (Figure
2). Fourth, miRNA sequences are nearly always conserved in related organisms, whereas endogenous
siRNA sequences are rarely conserved. These types of
differences are the basis of practical guidelines for distinguishing and annotating newly discovered miRNAs
and endogenous siRNAs (Ambros et al., 2003a).
Although much remains to be learned about the biological targets of miRNAs and endogenous siRNAs, a
fifth distinction can be made between these two classes
of silencing RNAs: endogenous siRNAs typically specify
“auto-silencing,” in that they specify the silencing of
the same locus (or very similar loci) from which they
originate, whereas miRNAs specify “hetero-silencing,”
in that they are produced from genes that specify the
silencing of very different genes (Figure 2, steps 7). Natural examples of auto-silencing include the silencing of
viruses, transposons, and the heterochromatic outer repeats of centromeres. Another example is the Drosophila Su(Ste) repeats, which generate siRNAs that silence
the Su(Ste) repeats themselves as well as the very similar
Stellate genes (Aravin et al., 2001). At first glance,
miR-127 and miR-136 might seem to be exceptions to
this principle because they originate from the antisense
strand of their presumptive target, the Rtl1 mRNA (Seitz
et al., 2003). However, because these genes lie in an
imprinted locus, in which the miRNAs are expressed
from the maternal chromosome and the Rtl1 mRNA is
expressed from the paternal chromosome, these
miRNAs can still be thought of as specifying heterosilencing. This fifth distinction explains the greater sequence conservation seen for miRNAs. To the extent
that the siRNAs come from the same loci that they target,
a mutational event that changes the sequence of the
siRNA would also change the sequence of its regulatory
target, and siRNA regulation would be preserved—an
unusual case of maintaining an important function without selective pressure for conserving the sequence. In
contrast, a mutation in a miRNA would rarely be accompanied by simultaneous compensatory changes at the
loci of its targets, and thus selection pressure would
preserve the miRNA sequence.
With these distinctions between the miRNAs and the
endogenous siRNAs in mind, it is perhaps worth considering how to classify the small RNAs that arise from
constructs introduced into cells for the purpose of gene
knockdown experiments. Small RNAs processed from
the extended double-stranded regions of long, inverted
repeats are clearly siRNAs. At the other extreme are
approximately 22 nt RNAs processed from pre-miRNAlike stem loops. For metazoan cases in which these
stem loops include the determinants for the sequential
processing by Drosha then Dicer, classification is again
simple; these would be artificial miRNAs. However, classification is less clear for RNAs deriving from the short
hairpin constructs typically used for knockdowns in
mammalian cells (Dykxhoorn et al., 2003), whose processing is unlikely to involve Drosha and even might not
involve Dicer.
Function: Regulatory Roles of miRNAs
The most pressing question to arise from the discovery
of the hundreds of different miRNAs is, what are all these

Review
291

Table 1. MicroRNAs and Their Functions: Examples for which Phenotypic Consequences of Disrupted or Ectopic miRNA Regulation Are Known
miRNA
Nematodes
lin-4 RNA
let-7 RNA
lsy-6 RNA
Insects
bantam miRNA
miR-14
Mammals
miR-181
Plants
miR165/166
miR172
miR-JAW
miR159

Target Gene(s)

Biological Role of miRNA/Target Gene

Refs

Ce lin-14 probable transcription factor
Ce lin-28 cold shock domain protein
Ce lin-41 probable RNA-binding protein
Ce hbl-1 transcription factor
Ce cog-1 transcription factor

Timing of early larval developmental transitions
Timing of early larval developmental transitions
Timing of late larval developmental transitions
Timing of late larval developmental transitions
Left/right asymmetry of chemoreceptor expression

1,2
3
4,5
6,7
8

Dm hid pro-apoptotic protein
unknown

Apoptosis and growth control during development
Apoptosis and fat metabolism

9
10

unknown

Hematopoietic differentiation

11

At REV and relelated transcription factors
At AP2 and related transcription factors
At TCP4 and releated transcription factors
At MYB33 and related transcription factors

Axial meristem initition and leaf development
Flower development; timing transition to flowering
Leaf development, embryonic patterning
Leaf development

12-14
15-18
19
12,15,19

Species abbreviations: Caenorhabditis elegans, Ce; Drosophila melanogaster, Dm; Arabidopsis thaliana, At.
1 (Lee et al., 1993); 2 (Wightman et al., 1993); 3 (Moss et al., 1997); 4 (Reinhart et al., 2000); 5 (Slack et al., 2000); 6 (Abrahante et al., 2003);
7 (Lin et al., 2003); 8 (Johnston and Hobert, 2003); 9 (Brennecke et al., 2003); 10 (Xu et al., 2003); 11 (Chen et al., 2004); 12 (Rhoades et al.,
2002); 13 (Tang et al., 2003); 14 (Emery et al., 2003); 15 (Park et al., 2002); 16 (Kasschau et al., 2003); 17 (Chen, 2003); 18 (Aukerman and
Sakai, 2003); 19 (Palatnik et al., 2003)

tiny noncoding RNAs doing? For lin-4, let-7, and several
other miRNAs identified by forward genetics, crucial
clues to their function and regulatory targets came even
before their status as noncoding RNA genes was discovered (Meneely and Herman, 1979; Chalfie et al., 1981;
Ambros, 1989; Weigel et al., 2000; Hipfner et al., 2002;
Aukerman and Sakai, 2003; Brennecke et al., 2003;
Johnston and Hobert, 2003; Xu et al., 2003). These and
other miRNAs that have reported functions based on in
vivo experimentation are listed in Table 1. For some of
these cases, function was determined by the phenotypic
consequences of a mutated miRNA or an altered miRNA
complementary site, either of which can disrupt miRNA
regulation. In other cases, function was inferred from
the effects of mutations or transgenic constructs that
lead to ectopic expression of the miRNA.
For the vast majority of miRNAs, the phenotypic consequences of disrupted or altered miRNA regulation are
not known. However, computational approaches are being developed to find the regulatory targets of the
miRNAs, providing clues to miRNA function based on
the known roles of these targets (Rhoades et al., 2002;
Enright et al., 2003; Lewis et al., 2003; Stark et al., 2003).
Computationally predicted targets supported by subsequent experiments or independent phylogenetic evidence are listed in Table 2. The experiments supporting
the identity of these targets typically fall into two classes.
In cases where the miRNA is thought to specify mRNA
cleavage, the cleavage products can be reverse-transcribed, cloned, and sequenced; a preponderance of
sequences that end precisely at the predicted site of
cleavage provides experimental validation that this
mRNA is a cleavage target of the complementary miRNA
(Llave et al., 2002b; Kasschau et al., 2003; Xie et al.,
2003). To enable detection of both translational repression and mRNA cleavage, heterologous reporter assays
can be used in which the miRNA complementary sites
are fused to a reporter gene and expression is examined
relative to control constructs, or in the presence and

absence of the miRNA (Lewis et al., 2003; Stark et al.,
2003). Caution is warranted when interpreting reporter
assays that involve multimerization of the miRNA complementary site(s) because such an assay succeeded
in validating a miRNA complementary site that was mistakenly taken from a gene that was unrelated to the
intended target but similarly annotated (Kawasaki and
Taira, 2003a, 2003b). A positive result in the heterologous reporter assay indicates that determinants needed
for miRNA regulation are indeed present within the
mRNA fragment fused to the reporter, which together
with evolutionary conservation of both the miRNA and
its complementary sites can provide reasonable evidence of a regulatory relationship. Of course, such a
hypothesis is considerably strengthened with evidence
of coincident expression of the miRNA and its target in
the animal or plant, or experiments that examine the
effects of manipulating the miRNA or its complementary
site in its native in vivo context.
Function: Roles of Plant miRNAs
In plants, miRNAs have a propensity to pair to mRNAs
with near-perfect complementarity, enabling convincing
targets to be readily predicted for most known plant
miRNAs (Rhoades et al., 2002; Bartel and Bartel, 2003).
Evolutionary conservation of the miRNA:mRNA pairing
in Arabidopsis and rice, together with experimental evidence showing that miRNAs can direct cleavage of targeted mRNAs, supports the validity of these predictions
(Llave et al., 2002a; Rhoades et al., 2002; Kasschau et
al., 2003; Tang et al., 2003). The known plant miRNAs
have a remarkable penchant for targeting transcription
factor gene families, particularly those with known or
suspected roles in developmental patterning or cell differentiation (Rhoades et al., 2002; Tables 1 and 2). This
explains the pleiotropic developmental phenotypes of
plants mutant in DCL1(CAF) and HEN1, genes known
to influence miRNA accumulation, and AGO1, a gene
that might be involved in miRNA function (Bohmert et al.,

Cell
292

Table 2. MicroRNAs and Their Functions: Examples for which Strong Evidence for the Validity of the Regulatory Target Has Been Reported
but the Phenotypic Consequences of Disrupted or Ectopic miRNA Regulation Are Not Yet Known
miRNA

Target Gene(s)

Biological Role of Target Gene(s)

Refs

Insects
miR-7

Dm HLHm3 basic HLH transcriptional repressor
Interprets Notch-mediated decisions in neuronal development 1,2
Dm hairy basic HLH transcriptional repressor
Interprets Notch-mediated decisions in neuronal development 2
Dm m4 Brd family protein
Interprets Notch-mediated decisions in neuronal development 2
miR-14 family Dm grim antagonist of caspase inhibitor
Promotes apoptosis
2
Dm reaper antagonist of caspase inhibitor
Promotes apoptosis
2
Dm sickle antagonist of caspase inhibitor
Promotes apoptosis
2
Mammals
miR-1
Hs Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
Growth factor; neuronal development
3
Hs Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
Oxidative stress resistance
3
miR-19a
Hs PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 phosphatase (PTEN)
Tumor suppressor gene
3
miR-23a
Hs Stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1)
Growth & localization of hematopoietic progenitor cells
3
Hs BRN-3b POU-domain transcription factor
Nueronal development
3
miR-26a
Hs SMAD-1 transcriptional co-modulator
Regulates TGF-dependent gene expression
3
miR-34
Hs Delta1 transmembrane protein
Activates Notch during cell-fate decisions
3
Hs Notch1 transmembrane receptor for Delta
Cell-fate decisions during development
3
miR-101
Hs ENX-1 polycomb gene
Proliferation of hemotpoeitic cells and other gene regulation
3
Hs N-MYC basic HLH transcription factor
Proto-oncogene; cell differentiation & proliferation
3
miR-130
Hs Macrophage colony stimulating factor-1 (MCSF) Mononuclear phagocytic lineage regulation
3
Plants
miR170/171
At SCL6-III, -IV & related transcription factors
Related to genes for root radial patterning
4-7
miR156/157
At SPL2 & related transcription factors
Related to genes for floral meristem identity
6,8
miR160
At ARF10, ARF17 & related transcription factors
Related to genes for auxin response & development
6,8
miR167
At ARF8 & ARF6 transcription factors
Related to genes for auxin response & development
6,8,9
miR164
At CUC1, CUC2 & related transcription factors
Shoot apical meristem formation & organ separation
6,8
miR169
At CBF-HAP2 DNA-binding proteins
unknown
6
miR162
At DCL1 Dicer-like RNase III
miRNA biogenesis
10,11
The metazoan regulatory targets listed were predicted computationally then supported experimentally. The plant regulatory targets listed were
predicted computationally then supported with independent phylogenetic and/or experimental evidence. Species abbreviations: Drosophila
melanogaster, Dm; human, Hs; Arabidopsis thaliana, At.
1 (Lai, 2002); 2 (Stark et al., 2003); 3 (Lewis et al., 2003); 4 (Llave et al., 2002a); 5 (Reinhart et al., 2002); 6 (Rhoades et al., 2002); 7 (Llave et
al., 2002b); 8 (Kasschau et al., 2003); 9 (Park et al., 2002); 10 (Xie et al., 2003); 11 (Bartel and Bartel, 2003)

1998; Jacobsen et al., 1999; Park et al., 2002; Reinhart et
al., 2002; Schauer et al., 2002). Of the few predicted
plant targets that are not transcription factors, two are
DCL1 and AGO1, suggesting a negative feedback mechanism that controls the expression of these genes with
known or suspected roles in miRNA biogenesis and
function (Rhoades et al., 2002; Bartel and Bartel, 2003;
Xie et al., 2003).
Why are there so many targets of the plant miRNAs
transcription factors that have been implicated in the
control of plant development? The model put forward to
answer this question proposes that many plant miRNAs
function during cellular differentiation by mediating the
degradation of key regulatory gene transcripts in specific daughter cell lineages (Rhoades et al., 2002; Figure
4). For example, during differentiation, certain genes
specifying a less differentiated state might need to be
turned off. This can be achieved by repressing transcription; however, a gene is not fully off until its message
stops making protein. Thus, to more quickly stop expression of such a gene, the differentiating cell can deploy a miRNA that specifies the cleavage of that mRNA.
The active clearing of the lingering regulatory messages
(or of new messages generated by continued transcription) could enable rapid daughter cell differentiation
without having to depend on regulatory genes having constitutively unstable messages. In this respect, miRNA regulation would be analogous to ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation, except that specific mRNAs, rather
than proteins, are targeted for degradation.

This model concurs with the observation that a mutation disrupting the miRNA complementary site of PHB
mRNA leads to a more expansive distribution of the
message, as if it were no longer being cleared from cells
expressing the miRNA (McConnell et al., 2001; Rhoades
et al., 2002). It also explains why so many of the initially
identified target genes specify formation and identity of
meristem, i.e., plant stem cells (Tables 1 and 2)—these
are precisely the genes that would need to be turned
off during early differentiation. The model also would
apply to scenarios later in differentiation or to cases
where the daughter cell is choosing among two or more
differentiated states, which would explain the targeting
of the other transcripts that have regulatory roles later
in development. One point of caution in trying to deduce
the general roles of plant miRNAs is that the known
set of plant miRNAs is enriched in the more abundant
miRNAs of plant tissues and organs and thus might not
be representative. For example, miRNAs specifying an
undifferentiated state would have been less likely to be
cloned because most cells of plant organs are typically differentiated.

Function: Roles of Animal miRNAs
Computational methods have recently been developed
to identify the targets of Drosophila and mammalian
miRNAs (Enright et al., 2003; Lewis et al., 2003; Stark et
al., 2003). These methods search for multiple conserved
regions of miRNA complementarity within 3⬘ UTRs. Iden-

Review
293

The ability to identify hundreds of miRNA targets with
confidence that most of the predicted targets are authentic enables the analysis of the types of genes most
commonly targeted by mammalian miRNAs (Lewis et al.,
2003). As in plants, the predicted targets are significantly
enriched in genes involved in transcriptional regulation,
suggesting that the model proposed for the roles of
many plant miRNAs (Figure 4) could also be operating
in animals. Nonetheless, this enrichment for transcriptional regulators is far less pronounced in mammals,
and only a minority of the predicted mammalian targets
are involved in development. The predicted targets represent a surprisingly broad diversity of molecular functions and biological processes. Thus, in contrast to the
plant miRNAs, most mammalian miRNAs do not appear
to be primarily involved at the upper levels of the gene
regulatory cascades but instead appear to be operating
at many levels to regulate the expression of a diverse
set of genes, many of which do not go on to directly
influence the expression of other genes (Lewis et al.,
2003).
Figure 4. Working Model for the Roles of miRNAs that Target the
Messages of Transcription Factors during Plant Development
Following cell division, the daughter cells inherit mRNAs from the
precursor cell (step 1). A differentiating daughter cell (cell on right)
expresses new transcription factor messages (green) as well as a
miRNA (red) complementary to messages that must be cleared (blue)
in order for the cell to progress to the differentiated state (step 2).
The miRNA directs the cleavage of target messages, preventing
prolonged or inappropriate expression of the transcriptional regulator, thus enabling the rapid differentiation of the daughter cell (step
3). (Figure redrawn from Rhoades et al., 2002, copyrighted by Cell
press, used with permission.)

tifying targets in animals has been a more difficult task
than in plants because in animals there are far fewer
mRNAs with near-perfect complementarity to miRNAs.
This makes the analysis noisier—much more prone to
false positives. Furthermore, evolutionary conservation
was used as a criterion for target identification in animals, and thus it could not be used as a means to
independently validate the targets. Nonetheless, the experimental support achieved for a majority of the predictions tested is encouraging (Table 2), and there are compelling reasons to take seriously the remaining untested
predictions. For example, in one of the fly studies, there
were striking clusters of functionally related genes
among the top predictions (Stark et al., 2003). The most
notable examples were Notch target genes for miR-7,
proapoptotic genes for miR-2, and a set of enzymes
involved in branched-chain amino acid degradation for
miR-277. In the mammalian study, over 400 regulatory
targets were predicted when using parameter cutoffs
that gave a signal-to-noise ratio of 3.2:1 (Lewis et al.,
2003). This signal:noise ratio was seen only when
restricting the miRNAs to those most conserved among
mammals and fish, and only when demanding perfect
complementarity to the most conserved portion of
miRNAs (the 7 nt core segment comprising residues 2–8
of the miRNAs), observations that would be exceedingly
difficult to explain if most of the identified messages
were not relevant targets of the miRNAs.

Function: The Question of Specificity
Although current lists of predicted miRNA targets provide insights and hypotheses for thousands of followup experiments, they could be far from comprehensive.
For example, in the animal studies, the computational
methods used evolutionary conservation to distinguish
miRNA target sites from the multitude of 3⬘ UTR segments that otherwise would score equally well with regard to the quality and stability of base pairing (Lewis
et al., 2003; Stark et al., 2003). The cell, on the other
hand, cannot use the filter of evolutionary conservation
to choose among the possibilities. Does this mean that
many of these other mRNAs would in fact be targeted
if expressed in the same cells as the cognate miRNAs?
Perhaps not—perhaps miRNA base pairing is not the
only major determinant of specificity. Proteins or mRNA
structure could restrict miRNP accessibility to the UTRs.
But if this were generally true, siRNA knockdown experiments might be expected to have a much lower success
rate. Proteins or mRNA structure could also facilitate
recognition of the authentic mRNA targets by means
of elements in the mRNAs that have thus far escaped
detection. One candidate for such a protein is the Fragile
X-related protein, a Drosophila RISC component that is
related to proteins known to bind specific mRNAs
(Caudy et al., 2002; Ishizuka et al., 2002).
The alternative idea—that the quality and stability of
base pairing is in fact the primary determinant of specificity—should also be considered. After all, this complementarity requirement includes a 7 nt perfect or nearperfect core match near the 5⬘ terminus of the miRNA
(Lai, 2002; Lewis et al., 2003; Stark et al., 2003), which
by itself would represent a degree of specificity comparable to that of the DNA sites recognized by many transcription factors. Pairing outside the 7 nt core site, although perhaps less important than once thought,
provides means of conferring added specificity. Just
as chromatin structure limits the possibilities for transcription-factor binding, the restricted set of genes
transcribed in each cell limits which genes of the genome will be under miRNA control in that cell. And in

Cell
294

the same way that the cooperative action of multiple
transcription factors increases the specificity of their
control, the cooperative action of homotypic and heterotypic miRNA:UTR interactions would provide an additional mechanism to increase specificity of miRNA control. Despite these mechanisms for increasing the
regulatory specificity, the notion that target-site recognition is primarily determined by multiple instances of
7 nt core complementarity would imply that miRNAs
influence the expression of a remarkably large number
of different mRNAs (Lewis et al., 2003).
The “many targets” hypothesis is embraced and partially rationalized in a proposal that the miRNA milieu,
unique to each cell type, provides important context for
the evolution of all mRNA sequences and is productively
used to dampen the utilization of thousands of mRNAs
(D.B. and C.-Z. Chen, unpublished). For mRNAs that
should not be expressed in a particular cell type,
miRNAs reduce protein production to inconsequential
levels. The result is equivalent to a discrete off switch,
and thus these messages, which include targets of Table
1, can be thought of as “switch targets.” In addition to
these classical targets, at least three other categories
of mRNAs can be imagined: For messages called “tuning
targets,” miRNAs could adjust protein output in a manner that allows for customized expression in different
cell types yet a more uniform level within each cell type.
Other mRNAs could be simply bystanders, “neutral targets,” for which downregulation by miRNAs is tolerated
or is negated by feedback processes. Finally, when
thinking about the effects of the miRNA milieu on the
evolution of mRNA sequences, it is also useful to consider “antitargets,” messages under selective pressure
to avoid fortuitous complementarity to the multitude of
miRNAs in the cells where they are expressed, either
because such complementarity would inappropriately
dampen their expression or because it would titrate the
miRNAs away from their proper targets.
While molecular biologists will have their hands full
identifying and characterizing additional instances
where miRNAs are playing the classical role of discrete
gene regulatory switches, computational and systems
biologists will have to contend with the prospect that a
substantial fraction of all animal mRNAs could have their
precise level of expression defined by miRNA regulation.
To the extent that the miRNAs direct translational repression rather than mRNA cleavage, this regulation will
be invisible to the most powerful tool of the systems
biologist, microarray analysis of mRNA levels. Nonetheless, in only two years since the abundance of miRNA
genes was reported, there has been rapid progress in
cataloging the miRNA genes, determining their expression patterns, and identifying their regulatory targets,
providing hope that the goal of accurately integrating
their function into models of metazoan gene regulatory
circuitry can one day be realized.
Acknowledgments
I thank members of my lab, plus B. Bartel, C. Burge, P. Zamore, T.
Tuschl, P. Sharp, and many other colleagues for their input and
stimulating discussions over the past few years, and P. Zamore, B.
Bartel, C. Burge, M. Lawrence, and others for helpful comments on
this manuscript. Work on miRNAs in my lab is currently supported by
grants from the NIH and the Alexander and Margaret Stewart Trust.

References
Abrahante, J.E., Daul, A.L., Li, M., Volk, M.L., Tennessen, J.M., Miller,
E.A., and Rougvie, A.E. (2003). The Caenorhabditis elegans hunchback-like gene lin-57/hbl-1 controls developmental time and is regulated by microRNAs. Dev. Cell 4, 625–637.
Ambros, V. (1989). A hierarchy of regulatory genes controls a larvato-adult developmental switch in C. elegans. Cell 57, 49–57.
Ambros, V., Bartel, B., Bartel, D.P., Burge, C.B., Carrington, J.C.,
Chen, X., Dreyfuss, G., Eddy, S.R., Griffiths-Jones, S., Marshall,
M., et al. (2003a). A uniform system for microRNA annotation. RNA
9, 277–279.
Ambros, V., Lee, R.C., Lavanway, A., Williams, P.T., and Jewell, D.
(2003b). MicroRNAs and other tiny endogenous RNAs in C. elegans.
Curr. Biol. 13, 807–818.
Aravin, A.A., Naumova, N.M., Tulin, A.V., Vagin, V.V., Rozovsky, Y.M.,
and Gvozdev, V.A. (2001). Double-stranded RNA-mediated silencing
of genomic tandem repeats and transposable elements in Drosophila melanogaster germline. Curr. Biol. 11, 1017–1027.
Aravin, A.A., Lagos-Quintana, M., Yalcin, A., Zavolan, M., Marks, D.,
Snyder, B., Gaasterland, T., Meyer, J., and Tuschl, T. (2003). The
small RNA profile during Drosophila melanogaster development.
Dev. Cell 5, 337–350.
Aukerman, M.J., and Sakai, H. (2003). Regulation of flowering time
and floral organ identity by a MicroRNA and its APETALA2-like target
genes. Plant Cell 10, 10.
Bartel, B., and Bartel, D.P. (2003). MicroRNAs: At the root of plant
development? Plant Physiol. 132, 709–717.
Bashirullah, A., Pasquinelli, A.E., Kiger, A.A., Perrimon, N., Ruvkun,
G., and Thummel, C.S. (2003). Coordinate regulation of small temporal RNAs at the onset of Drosophila metamorphosis. Dev. Biol.
259, 1–8.
Basyuk, E., Suavet, F., Doglio, A., Bordonne, R., and Bertrand, E.
(2003). Human let-7 stem-loop precursors harbor features of RNase
III cleavage products. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 6593–6597.
Bernstein, E., Caudy, A.A., Hammond, S.M., and Hannon, G.J. (2001).
Role for a bidentate ribonuclease in the initiation step of RNA interference. Nature 409, 295–296.
Bohmert, K., Camus, I., Bellini, C., Bouchez, D., Caboche, M., and
Benning, C. (1998). AGO1 defines a novel locus of Arabidopsis controlling leaf development. EMBO J. 17, 170–180.
Bollman, K.M., Aukerman, M.J., Park, M.Y., Hunter, C., Berardini,
T.Z., and Poethig, R.S. (2003). HASTY, the Arabidopsis ortholog
of exportin 5/MSN5, regulates phase change and morphogenesis.
Development 130, 1493–1504.
Brennecke, J., Hipfner, D.R., Stark, A., Russell, R.B., and Cohen,
S.M. (2003). bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in Drosophila. Cell 113, 25–36.
Calin, G.A., Dumitru, C.D., Shimizu, M., Bichi, R., Zupo, S., Noch,
E., Aldler, H., Rattan, S., Keating, M., Rai, K., et al. (2002). Frequent
deletions and down-regulation of micro- RNA genes miR15 and
miR16 at 13q14 in chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 99, 15524–15529.
Catalanotto, C., Azzalin, G., Macino, G., and Cogoni, C. (2000). Gene
silencing in worms and fungi. Nature 404, 245.
Caudy, A.A., Myers, M., Hannon, G.J., and Hammond, S.M. (2002).
Fragile X-related protein and VIG associate with the RNA interference machinery. Genes Dev. 16, 2491–2496.
Caudy, A.A., Ketting, R.F., Hammond, S.M., Denli, A.M., Bathoorn,
A.M., Tops, B.B., Silva, J.M., Myers, M.M., Hannon, G.J., and Plasterk, R.H. (2003). A micrococcal nuclease homologue in RNAi effector complexes. Nature 425, 411–414.
Cerutti, L., Mian, N., and Bateman, A. (2000). Domains in gene silencing and cell differentiation proteins: the novel PAZ domain and redefinition of the Piwi domain. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25, 481–482.
Chalfie, M., Horvitz, H.R., and Sulston, J.E. (1981). Mutations that
lead to reiterations in the cell lineages of C. elegans. Cell 24, 59–69.
Chen, X. (2003). A MicroRNA as a Translational Repressor of APET-

Review
295

ALA2 in Arabidopsis Flower Development. Science. Published online
September 11, 2003. 10.1126/science.1088060.

Hipfner, D.R., Weigmann, K., and Cohen, S.M. (2002). The bantam
gene regulates Drosophila growth. Genetics 161, 1527–1537.

Chen, C.Z., Li, L., Lodish, H.F., and Bartel, D.P. (2004). MicroRNAs
modulate hematopoietic lineage differentiation. Science 303, 83–86.

Houbaviy, H.B., Murray, M.F., and Sharp, P.A. (2003). Embryonic
stem cell-specific microRNAs. Dev. Cell 5, 351–358.

Cogoni, C., and Macino, G. (1999). Gene silencing in Neurospora
crassa requires a protein homologous to RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Nature 399, 166–169.

Hutvágner, G., and Zamore, P.D. (2002). A microRNA in a multipleturnover RNAi enzyme complex. Science 297, 2056–2060.

Dalmay, T., Hamilton, A., Rudd, S., Angell, S., and Baulcombe, D.C.
(2000). An RNA-dependent RNA polymerase in Arabidopsis is required for posttranscriptional gene silencing mediated by a transgene but not by a virus. Cell 101, 543–553.
Doench, J.G., Peterson, C.P., and Sharp, P.A. (2003). siRNAs can
function as miRNAs. Genes Dev. 17, 438–442.
Dostie, J., Mourelatos, Z., Yang, M., Sharma, A., and Dreyfuss, G.
(2003). Numerous microRNPs in neuronal cells containing novel microRNAs. RNA 9, 631–632.
Dykxhoorn, D.M., Novina, C.D., and Sharp, P.A. (2003). Killing the
messenger: short RNAs that silence gene expression. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 4, 457–467.
Elbashir, S.M., Leneckel, W., and Tuschl, T. (2001a). RNA interference is mediated by 21- and 22- nucleotide RNAs. Genes Dev.
15, 188–200.
Elbashir, S.M., Martinez, J., Patkaniowska, A., Lendeckel, W., and
Tuschl, T. (2001b). Functional anatomy of siRNAs for mediating efficient RNAi in Drosophila melanogaster embryo lysate. EMBO J.
20, 6877–6888.
Emery, J.F., Floyd, S.K., Alvarez, J., Eshed, Y., Hawker, N.P., Izhaki,
A., Baum, S.F., and Bowman, J.L. (2003). Radial patterning of arabidopsis shoots by class III HD-ZIP and KANADI genes. Curr. Biol.
13, 1768–1774.
Enright, A.J., John, B., Gaul, U., Tuschl, T., Sander, C., and Marks,
D.S. (2003). MicroRNA targets in Drosophila. Genome Biol. 5, R1.
Fagard, M., Boutet, S., Morel, J.B., Bellini, C., and Vaucheret, H.
(2000). AGO1, QDE-2, and RDE-1 are related proteins required for
post-transcriptional gene silencing in plants, quelling in fungi, and
RNA interference in animals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11650–
11654.
Fire, A., Xu, S., Montgomery, M.K., Kostas, S.A., Driver, S.E., and
Mello, C.C. (1998). Potent and specific genetic interference by double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 391, 806–811.
Gauwerky, C.E., Huebner, K., Isobe, M., Nowell, P.C., and Croce,
C.M. (1989). Activation of MYC in a masked t(8;17) translocation
results in an aggressive B-cell leukemia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
86, 8867–8871.
Grad, Y., Aach, J., Hayes, G.D., Reinhart, B.J., Church, G.M., Ruvkun,
G., and Kim, J. (2003). Computational and experimental identification
of C. elegans microRNAs. Mol. Cell 11, 1253–1263.
Griffiths-Jones, S. (2004). The microRNA registry. Nucleic Acids Res.
32, D109–D111.
Grishok, A., Pasquinelli, A.E., Conte, D., Li, N., Parrish, S., Ha, I.,
Baillie, D.L., Fire, A., Ruvkun, G., and Mello, C.C. (2001). Genes and
mechanisms related to RNA interference regulate expression of the
small temporal RNAs that control C. elegans developmental timing.
Cell 106, 23–34.
Hall, I.M., Shankaranarayana, G.D., Noma, K., Ayoub, N., Cohen,
A., and Grewal, S.I. (2002). Establishment and maintenance of a
heterochromatin domain. Science 297, 2232–2237.
Hamilton, A.J., and Baulcombe, D.C. (1999). A novel species of
small antisense RNA in posttranscriptional gene silencing. Science
286, 950–952.
Hamilton, A., Voinnet, O., Chappell, L., and Baulcombe, D. (2002).
Two classes of short interfering RNA in RNA silencing. Embo J.
21, 4671–4679.
Hammond, S.C., Bernstein, E., Beach, D., and Hannon, G.J. (2000).
An RNA-directed nuclease mediates posttranscriptional gene silencing in Drosophila cells. Nature 404, 293–296.
Hammond, S.M., Boettcher, S., Caudy, A.C., Kobayashi, R., and
Hannon, G.J. (2001). Argonaute2, a link between genetic and biochemical analyses of RNAi. Science 293, 1146–1150.

Hutvágner, G., McLachlan, J., Pasquinelli, A.E., Balint, E., Tuschl, T.,
and Zamore, P.D. (2001). A cellular function for the RNA-interference
enzyme Dicer in the maturation of the let-7 small temporal RNA.
Science 293, 834–838.
Ishizuka, A., Siomi, M.C., and Siomi, H. (2002). A Drosophila fragile
X protein interacts with components of RNAi and ribosomal proteins.
Genes Dev. 16, 2497–2508.
Jackson, A.L., Bartz, S.R., Schelter, J., Kobayashi, S.V., Burchard,
J., Mao, M., Li, B., Cavet, G., and Linsley, P.S. (2003). Expression
profiling reveals off-target gene regulation by RNAi. Nat. Biotechnol.
21, 635–637.
Jacobsen, S.E., Running, M.P., and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1999). Disruption of an RNA helicase/RNAseIII gene in Arabidopsis causes unregulated cell division in floral meristems. Development 126, 5231–
5243.
Johnson, S.M., Lin, S.Y., and Slack, F.J. (2003). The time of appearance of the C. elegans let-7 microRNA is transcriptionally controlled
utilizing a temporal regulatory element in its promoter. Dev. Biol.
259, 364–379.
Johnston, R.J., and Hobert, O. (2003). A microRNA controlling left/
right neuronal asymmetry in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 426,
845–849.
Kasschau, K.D., Xie, Z., Allen, E., Llave, C., Chapman, E.J., Krizan,
K.A., and Carrington, J.C. (2003). P1/HC-Pro, a viral suppressor of
RNA silencing, interferes with Arabidopsis development and miRNA
function. Dev. Cell 4, 205–217.
Kawasaki, H., and Taira, K. (2003a). Hes1 is a target of microRNA23 during retinoic-acid-induced neuronal differentiation of NT2 cells.
Nature 423, 838–842.
Kawasaki, H., and Taira, K. (2003b). retraction: Hes1 is a target of
microRNA-23 during retinoic-acid-induced neuronal differentiation
of NT2 cells. Nature 426, 100.
Ketting, R.F., Haverkamp, T.H., vanLuenen, H.G., and Plasterk, R.H.
(1999). Mut-7 of C. elegans, required for transposon silencing and
RNA interference, is a homolog of Werner sydrome helicase and
RNaseD. Cell 99, 133–141.
Ketting, R.F., Fischer, S.E.J., Bernstein, E., Sijen, T., Hannon, G.J.,
and Plasterk, R.H.A. (2001). Dicer functions in RNA interference and
in synthesis of small RNA involved in developmental timing in C.
elegans. Genes Dev. 15, 2654–2659.
Khvorova, A., Reynolds, A., and Jayasena, S.D. (2003). Functional
siRNAs and miRNAs exhibit strand bias. Cell 115, 209–216.
Kim, J., Krichevsky, A., Grad, Y., Hayes, G.D., Kosik, K.S., Church,
G.M., and Ruvkun, G. (2003). Identification of many microRNAs that
copurify with polyribosomes in mammalian neurons. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA. Published online December 22, 2003, 10.1073/
pnas.2333854100.
Knight, S.W., and Bass, B.L. (2001). A role for the RNase III enzyme
DCR-1 in RNA interference and germ line development, in caenorhabditis elegens. Science 293, 2269–2271.
Krichevsky, A.M., King, K.S., Donahue, C.P., Khrapko, K., and Kosik,
K.S. (2003). A microRNA array reveals extensive regulation of microRNAs during brain development. RNA 9, 1274–1281.
Kuersten, S., and Goodwin, E.B. (2003). The power of the 3⬘ UTR:
translational control and development. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4, 626–637.
Lagos-Quintana, M., Rauhut, R., Lendeckel, W., and Tuschl, T.
(2001). Identification of novel genes coding for small expressed
RNAs. Science 294, 853–858.
Lagos-Quintana, M., Rauhut, R., Yalcin, A., Meyer, J., Lendeckel,
W., and Tuschl, T. (2002). Identification of tissue-specific microRNAs
from mouse. Curr. Biol. 12, 735–739.
Lagos-Quintana, M., Rauhut, R., Meyer, J., Borkhardt, A., and

Cell
296

Tuschl, T. (2003). New microRNAs from mouse and human. RNA
9, 175–179.
Lai, E.C. (2002). MicroRNAs are complementary to 3⬘UTR motifs
that mediate negative post-transcriptional regulation. Nat. Genet.
30, 363–364.
Lai, E.C., Tomancak, P., Williams, R.W., and Rubin, G.M. (2003).
Computational identification of Drosophila microRNA genes. Genome Biol 4:R42, 1–20.
Lau, N.C., Lim, L.P., Weinstein, E.G., and Bartel, D.P. (2001). An
abundant class of tiny RNAs with probable regulatory roles in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 294, 858–862.
Lee, R.C., and Ambros, V. (2001). An extensive class of small RNAs
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 294, 862–864.
Lee, R.C., Feinbaum, R.L., and Ambros, V. (1993). The C. elegans
heterochronic gene lin-4 encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin-14. Cell 75, 843–854.
Lee, Y., Jeon, K., Lee, J.T., Kim, S., and Kim, V.N. (2002). MicroRNA
maturation: stepwise processing and subcellular localization. EMBO
J. 21, 4663–4670.

Moss, E.G., Lee, R.C., and Ambros, V. (1997). The cold shock domain
protein LIN-28 controls developmental timing in C. elegans and is
regulated by the lin-4 RNA. Cell 88, 637–646.
Mourelatos, Z., Dostie, J., Paushkin, S., Sharma, A., Charroux, B.,
Abel, L., Rappsilber, J., Mann, M., and Dreyfuss, G. (2002). miRNPs: a
novel class of ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs.
Genes Dev. 16, 720–728.
Mourrain, P., Beclin, C., Elmayan, T., Feuerbach, F., Godon, C.,
Morel, J.B., Jouette, D., Lacombe, A.M., Nikic, S., Picault, N., et al.
(2000). Arabidopsis SGS2 and SGS3 genes are required for posttranscriptional gene silencing and natural virus resistance. Cell 101,
533–542.
Nykänen, A., Haley, B., and Zamore, P.D. (2001). ATP requirements
and small interfering RNA structure in the RNA interference pathway.
Cell 107, 309–321.
Ohler, U., Yekta, S., Lim, L.P., Bartel, D.P., and Burge, C.B. (2004).
Patterns of flanking sequence conservation and a characteristic
upstream motif for microRNA gene identification. RNA, in press.

Lee, Y., Ahn, C., Han, J., Choi, H., Kim, J., Yim, J., Lee, J., Provost,
P., Radmark, O., Kim, S., and Kim, V.N. (2003). The nuclear RNase
III Drosha initiates microRNA processing. Nature 425, 415–419.

Olsen, P.H., and Ambros, V. (1999). The lin-4 regulatory RNA controls
developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans by blocking LIN-14
protein synthesis after the initiation of translation. Dev. Biol. 216,
671–680.

Lewis, B.P., Shih, I., Jones-Rhoades, M.W., Bartel, D.P., and Burge,
C.B. (2003). Prediction of mammalian microRNA targets. Cell 115,
787–798.

Palatnik, J.F., Allen, E., Wu, X., Schommer, C., Schwab, R., Carrington, J.C., and Weigel, D. (2003). Control of leaf morphogenesis by
microRNAs. Nature 425, 257–263.

Li, H., Li, W.X., and Ding, S.W. (2002). Induction and suppression
of RNA silencing by an animal virus. Science 296, 1319–1321.

Papp, I., Mette, M.F., Aufsatz, W., Daxinger, L., Schauer, S.E., Ray,
A., van der Winden, J., Matzke, M., and Matzke, A.J. (2003). Evidence
for nuclear processing of plant micro RNA and short interfering RNA
precursors. Plant Physiol. 132, 1382–1390.

Lim, L.P., Lau, N.C., Weinstein, E.G., Abdelhakim, A., Yekta, S.,
Rhoades, M.W., Burge, C.B., and Bartel, D.P. (2003a). The microRNAs of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genes Dev. 17, 991–1008.
Lim, L.P., Glasner, M.E., Yekta, S., Burge, C.B., and Bartel, D.P.
(2003b). Vertebrate microRNA genes. Science 299, 1540.
Lin, S.Y., Johnson, S.M., Abraham, M., Vella, M.C., Pasquinelli, A.,
Gamberi, C., Gottlieb, E., and Slack, F.J. (2003). The C. elegans
hunchback homolog, hbl-1, controls temporal patterning and is a
probable microRNA target. Dev. Cell 4, 639–650.
Lingel, A., Simon, B., Izaurralde, E., and Sattler, M. (2003). Structure
and nucleic-acid binding of the Drosophila Argonaute 2 PAZ domain.
Nature 426, 465–469.
Llave, C., Kasschau, K.D., Rector, M.A., and Carrington, J.C. (2002a).
Endogenous and silencing-associated small RNAs in plants. Plant
Cell 14, 1605–1619.
Llave, C., Xie, Z., Kasschau, K.D., and Carrington, J.C. (2002b).
Cleavage of Scarecrow-like mRNA targets directed by a class of
Arabidopsis miRNA. Science 297, 2053–2056.
Lund, E., Güttinger, S., Calado, A., Dahlberg, J.E., and Kutay, U.
(2004). Nuclear export of microRNA precursors. Science 303, 95–98.
Martinez, J., Patkaniowska, A., Urlaub, H., Luhrmann, R., and Tuschl,
T. (2002). Single-stranded antisense siRNAs guide target RNA cleavage in RNAi. Cell 110, 563–574.
McConnell, J.R., Emery, J., Eshed, Y., Bao, N., Bowman, J., and
Barton, M.K. (2001). Role of PHABULOSA and PHAVOLUTA in determining radial patterning in shoots. Nature 411, 709–713.
Meneely, P.M., and Herman, R.K. (1979). Lethals, steriles and deficiencies in a region of the X chromosome of Caenorhabditis elegans.
Genetics 92, 99–115.
Mette, M.F., Aufsatz, W., Winden, J.v.d., Matzke, M.A., and Matzke,
A.J. (2000). Transcriptional silencing and promoter methylation triggered by double-stranded RNA. EMBO J. 19, 5194–5201.
Mette, M.F., van der Winden, J., Matzke, M., and Matzke, A.J. (2002).
Short RNAs can identify new candidate transposable element families in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol. 130, 6–9.
Michael, M.Z., O’Connor, S.M., van Holst Pellekaan, N.G., Young,
G.P., and James, R.J. (2003). Reduced accumulation of specific
microRNAs in colorectal neoplasia. Mol. Cancer Res. 1, 882–91.
Mochizuki, K., Fine, N.A., Fujisawa, T., and Gorovsky, M.A. (2002).
Analysis of a piwi-related gene implicates small RNAs in genome
rearrangement in tetrahymena. Cell 110, 689–699.

Park, W., Li, J., Song, R., Messing, J., and Chen, X. (2002). CARPEL
FACTORY, a Dicer homolog, and HEN1, a novel protein, act in microRNA metabolism in Arabidopsis thaliana. Curr. Biol. 12, 1484–
1495.
Parrish, S., Fleenor, J., Xu, S., Mello, C., and Fire, A. (2000). Functional anatomy of a dsRNA trigger: differential requirement for the
two trigger strands in RNA interference. Mol. Cell 6, 1077–1087.
Pasquinelli, A.E., Reinhart, B.J., Slack, F., Martindale, M.Q., Kuroda,
M., Maller, B., Srinivasan, A., Fishman, M., Hayward, D., Ball, E., et
al. (2000). Conservation across animal phylogeny of the sequence
and temporal regulation of the 21 nucleotide let-7 heterochronic
regulatory RNA. Nature 408, 86–89.
Pickford, A.S., Catalanotto, C., Cogoni, C., and Macino, G. (2002).
Quelling in Neurospora crassa. Adv. Genet. 46, 277–303.
Pusch, O., Boden, D., Silbermann, R., Lee, F., Tucker, L., and Ramratnam, B. (2003). Nucleotide sequence homology requirements of
HIV-1-specific short hairpin RNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 6444–6449.
Reinhart, B.J., and Bartel, D.P. (2002). Small RNAs correspond to
centromere heterochromatic repeats. Science 297, 1831.
Reinhart, B.J., Slack, F.J., Basson, M., Bettinger, J.C., Pasquinelli,
A.E., Rougvie, A.E., Horvitz, H.R., and Ruvkun, G. (2000). The 21
nucleotide let-7 RNA regulates developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 403, 901–906.
Reinhart, B.J., Weinstein, E.G., Rhoades, M.W., Bartel, B., and Bartel, D.P. (2002). MicroRNAs in plants. Genes Dev. 16, 1616–1626.
Rhoades, M.W., Reinhart, B.J., Lim, L.P., Burge, C.B., Bartel, B.,
and Bartel, D.P. (2002). Prediction of plant microRNA targets. Cell
110, 513–520.
Saxena, S., Jonsson, Z.O., and Dutta, A. (2003). Small RNAs with
imperfect match to endogenous mRNA repress translation. Implications for off-target activity of small inhibitory RNA in mammalian
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 44312–44319.
Schauer, S.E., Jacobsen, S.E., Meinke, D.W., and Ray, A. (2002).
DICER-LIKE1: blind men and elephants in Arabidopsis development.
Trends Plant Sci. 7, 487–491.
Schwarz, D.S., Hutvágner, G., Haley, B., and Zamore, P.D. (2002).
Evidence that siRNAs function as guides, not primers, in the Drosophila and human RNAi pathways. Mol. Cell 10, 537–548.
Schwarz, D.S., Hutvagner, G., Du, T., Xu, Z., Aronin, N., and Zamore,

Review
297

P.D. (2003). Asymmetry in the assembly of the RNAi enzyme complex. Cell 115, 199–208.

designed micro RNAs can inhibit the expression of cognate mRNAs
when expressed in human cells. Mol. Cell 9, 1327–1333.

Seggerson, K., Tang, L., and Moss, E.G. (2002). Two genetic circuits
repress the Caenorhabditis elegans heterochronic gene lin-28 after
translation initiation. Dev. Biol. 243, 215–225.

Zeng, Y., Yi, R., and Cullen, B.R. (2003). MicroRNAs and small interfering RNAs can inhibit mRNA expression by similar mechanisms.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 9779–9784.

Seitz, H., Youngson, N., Lin, S.P., Dalbert, S., Paulsen, M., Bachellerie, J.P., Ferguson-Smith, A.C., and Cavaille, J. (2003). Imprinted
microRNA genes transcribed antisense to a reciprocally imprinted
retrotransposon-like gene. Nat. Genet. 34, 261–262.

Zhang, H., Kolb, F.A., Brondani, V., Billy, E., and Filipowicz, W. (2002).
Human Dicer preferentially cleaves dsRNAs at their termini without
a requirement for ATP. EMBO J. 21, 5875–5885.

Sempere, L.F., Sokol, N.S., Dubrovsky, E.B., Berger, E.M., and
Ambros, V. (2003). Temporal regulation of microRNA expression in
Drosophila melanogaster mediated by hormonal signals and broadComplex gene activity. Dev. Biol. 259, 9–18.
Slack, F.J., Basson, M., Liu, Z., Ambros, V., Horvitz, H.R., and Ruvkun, G. (2000). The lin-41 RBCC gene acts in the C. elegans heterochronic pathway between the let-7 regulatory RNA and the LIN-29
transcription factor. Mol. Cell 5, 659–669.
Smardon, A., Spoerke, J.M., Stacey, S.C., Klein, M.E., Mackin, N.,
and Maine, E.M. (2000). EGO-1 is related to RNA-directed RNA polymerase and functions in germ-line development and RNA interference in C. elegans. Curr. Biol. 10, 169–178.
Song, J.J., Liu, J., Tolia, N.H., Schneiderman, J., Smith, S.K., Martienssen, R.A., Hannon, G.J., and Joshua-Tor, L. (2003). The crystal
structure of the Argonaute2 PAZ domain reveals an RNA binding
motif in RNAi effector complexes. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 1026–1032.
Stark, A., Brennecke, J., Russell, R.B., and Cohen, S.M. (2003). Identification of Drosophila microRNA targets. PLOS Biol. 1, E60.
Tabara, H., Sarkissian, M., Kelly, W.G., Fleenor, J., Grishok, A., Timmons, L., Fire, A., and Mello, C.C. (1999). The rde-1 gene, RNA
interference, and transposon silencing in C. elegans. Cell 99,
123–132.
Tang, G., Reinhart, B.J., Bartel, D.P., and Zamore, P.D. (2003). A
biochemical framework for RNA silencing in plants. Genes Dev.
17, 49–63.
Vance, V., and Vaucheret, H. (2001). RNA silencing in plants - defense
and counterdefense. Science 292, 2277–2280.
Volpe, T., Kidner, C., Hall, I., Teng, G., Grewal, S., and Martienssen,
R. (2002). Heterochromatic silencing and histone H3 lysine 9 methylation are regulated by RNA interference. Science 297, 1833–1837.
Weigel, D., Ahn, J.H., Blazquez, M.A., Borevitz, J.O., Christensen,
S.K., Fankhauser, C., Ferrandiz, C., Kardailsky, I., Malancharuvil,
E.J., Neff, M.M., et al. (2000). Activation tagging in Arabidopsis. Plant
Physiol. 122, 1003–1013.
Wightman, B., Burglin, T.R., Gatto, J., Arasu, P., and Ruvkun, G.
(1991). Negative regulatory sequences in the lin-14 3⬘-untranslated
region are necessary to generate a temporal switch during Caenorhabditis elegans development. Genes Dev. 5, 1813–1824.
Wightman, B., Ha, I., and Ruvkun, G. (1993). Posttranscriptional
regulation of the heterochronic gene lin-14 by lin-4 mediates temporal pattern formation in C. elegans. Cell 75, 855–862.
Xie, Z., Kasschau, K.D., and Carrington, J.C. (2003). Negative feedback regulation of Dicer-like1 in Arabidopsis by microRNA-guided
mRNA degradation. Curr. Biol. 13, 784–789.
Xu, P., Vernooy, S.Y., Guo, M., and Hay, B.A. (2003). The Drosophila
microRNA mir-14 suppresses cell death and is required for normal
fat metabolism. Curr. Biol. 13, 790–795.
Yan, K.S., Yan, S., Farooq, A., Han, A., Zeng, L., and Zhou, M.M.
(2003). Structure and conserved RNA binding of the PAZ domain.
Nature 426, 468–474.
Yi, R., Qin, Y., Macara, I.G., and Cullen, B.R. (2003). Exportin-5
mediates the nuclear export of pre-microRNAs and short hairpin
RNAs. Genes Dev. 17, 3011–3016.
Zamore, P.D., Tuschl, T., Sharp, P.A., and Bartel, D.P. (2000). RNAi:
double-stranded RNA directs the ATP-dependent cleavage of
mRNA at 21 to 23 nucleotide intervals. Cell 101, 25–33.
Zeng, Y., and Cullen, B.R. (2003). Sequence requirements for micro
RNA processing and function in human cells. RNA 9, 112–123.
Zeng, Y., Wagner, E.J., and Cullen, B.R. (2002). Both natural and

Zilberman, D., Cao, X., and Jacobsen, S.E. (2003). ARGONAUTE4
control of locus-specific siRNA accumulation and DNA and histone
methylation. Science 299, 716–719.

