Acquired and multigenic

review

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Open

MT

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy: Success by
Design Meets Failure by Efficacy
Raymond T Bartus1,2, Marc S Weinberg3 and R. Jude Samulski3,4
Ceregene, Inc., San Diego, California, USA; 2RTBioconsultants, Inc., San Diego, California, USA; 3Gene Therapy Center, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA; 4Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA

1

Over the past decade, nine gene therapy clinical trials for Parkinson’s disease (PD) have been initiated and completed.
Starting with considerable optimism at the initiation of each trial, none of the programs has yet borne sufficiently robust
clinical efficacy or found a clear path toward regulatory approval. Despite the immediately disappointing nature of the
efficacy outcomes in these trials, the clinical data garnered from the individual studies nonetheless represent tangible
and significant progress for the gene therapy field. Collectively, the clinical trials demonstrate that we have overcome
the major safety hurdles previously suppressing central nervous system (CNS) gene therapy, for none produced any evidence of untoward risk or harm after administration of various vector-delivery systems. More importantly, these studies
also demonstrated controlled, highly persistent generation of biologically active proteins targeted to structures deep in
the human brain. Therefore, a renewed, focused emphasis must be placed on advancing clinical efficacy by improving
clinical trial design, patient selection and outcome measures, developing more predictive animal models to support clinical testing, carefully performing retrospective analyses, and most importantly moving forward—beyond our past limits.
Received 27 September 2013; accepted 5 December 2013; advance online publication 21 January 2014. doi:10.1038/mt.2013.281

BACKGROUND: IMPETUS AND OUTCOMES WITH
PARKINSON’S GENE THERAPY (GT) TRIALS

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a chronic, progressive neurodegenerative disease most widely recognized for the profound degeneration
of mid-brain dopamine nigrostriatal neurons linked to serious
motor symptoms.1 However, PD is far more complex than commonly appreciated, with multiple etiologic variables and pathogenic
pathways, complex pathologies, and a wide range of central nervous
system (CNS) and non-CNS symptoms (Table 1).2,3 Moreover, wide
gaps in our understanding still exist at each disease level (i.e., etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, symptoms), and the cause-effect relationships between them remain especially obscure. Arguably, the
most well-characterized relationship exists with regard to nigrostriatal degeneration linked to the key motor symptoms; currrent
oral dopaminergic pharmaceuticals are effective in controlling
these symptoms at early disease stages. However, the drugs’ effectiveness decline with progressive pathology, leading to gradual
incapacitation of patients by increased “off ” time (i.e., periods of
no symptomatic relief) and increasing side effects such as peakdose dyskinesias.1 Thus, adequate treatment of the nigrostriatal-­
mediated motor impairments continues to represent a significant
unmet medical need, affecting over 4 million people worldwide.4
Though a number of solutions have been conceived to improve
the function of the degenerating dopaminergic system, translating
these biopharmaceutical concepts to the clinic has been challenging
due to obstacles associated with delivering macromolecules to the
central nervous system in a persistent and targeted fashion.
Progress achieved in the realm of gene therapy (GT) over
the past decade has offered solutions to many of the delivery

constraints,5 and several aspects of PD present it overtly as an
ideal clinical indication to target using GT: (i) the well-defined,
localizable, and targetable neuronal systems involved with major
motor symptoms, (ii) the need for relatively small titer and volume of vector targeted to those sites, which avoids the systemic
circulation of immunogenic materials, and (iii) the large and
increasing demand for improved therapeutics with an aging population,4 which in whole bolsters impact and financial support for
research and development. Given this rationale, PD has, for better or worse, become a key exemplar for CNS GT. To date, the
results of completed PD GT trials have supported the safety of
GT targeting in the brain and many have further confirmed the
successfully targeted expression of bioactive proteins in specific
brain sites. However, none of the programs has yet produced sufficiently robust or reliable efficacy data to enable initiation of a
pivotal phase 3 trial required for regulatory approval. We attempt
to integrate the many successes and formidable challenges of GT
treatment of PD, in an effort to seek the best path forward for PD
and CNS GT as a whole.

THE LOOK-SEE APPROACH

As compared with conventional small molecule drug testing, GT
in the CNS is limited with respect to establishing initial dosing,
quantifying targeting success, and accessing a comprehensive
gauge of transgene production and localization, all of which provide the basis for iterative improvement with traditional drug
development. While we expect that such limitations are attributable to a short-lasting gap between demand and current technological capability, the ramifications of such limitations include

Correspondence: R. Jude Samulski, Gene Therapy Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA. E-mail: rjs@med.unc.edu or
Raymond T Bartus, RTBioconsultants, Inc., Shannon Ridge Lane, San Diego, CA, USA. E-mail: bartus@RTBioconsultants.com
Molecular Therapy vol. 22 no. 3, 487–497 mar. 2014

487

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

Table 1 Complex etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, and symptomatology of Parkinson’s disease

Loss of function and gradual
axonopathy/death of mid-brain
dopamine neurons

Oxidative damage
α-synuclein misfolding (&
possible prion-like reactions)
Apoptosis

Environmental factors (e.g.,
age, pesticides, herbicides, head
trauma, fertilizers)

Neuroinflammation

α-synuclein accumulation (Lewy
bodies)
Tau phosphorylation
Loss of function and gradual
death of neurons in several other
PNS and CNS neuronal systems

Symptoms




Pathology

Mitochrondrial dysfunction



Pathogenesis

Genetic mutationsa (SNCAb,
PINK1c, LRRK2d, PRKNe, DJ1 -or
PARK7f, ATP13A2)



Etiology

Loss of voluntary motor function
(bradykinesia, rigidity, tremors, and
eventually postural instability)

Cognitive deficits; psychiatric issues;
olfactory deficits; REM sleep disturbances,
autonomic dysfunction (e.g., urinary/GI
complications)

CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal; PNS, peripheral nervous system; REM, rapid eye movement.
a
Proteins encoded by mutated genes: bα-synuclein; cPTEN-induced putative kinase 1; dleucine-rich repeat kinase 2; eparkin; fPark-7 (peptidase C56 protein family).

poor predictive power and a loss of continuity and progress
between successive trials.
Whereas continuing progress is being made in the visualization of viral vectors as they are delivered to the brain (e.g., the use
of gadolinium-containing liposomes coupled with magnetic resonance imaging),6,7 there is currently no direct means to determine
the distribution or magnitude of transgene expression, since protein expression with CNS GT trials is both generated and produced
entirely within the confines of the human brain. Therefore, it is not
yet possible to confirm proper dose selection or monitor dosing
levels, as would normally be done using standard pharmacokinetic (i.e., plasma level) methods. This severely limits the predictive and correlative strength of treatment endpoint measurements.
One surrogate means by which transgene expression and function
has been assessed is positron emission tomography (PET) imaging coupled with radiolabeled L-Dopa.8 This approach has enabled
the live imaging of the dopamine precursor’s uptake, which when
compared to pretreatment levels can be directly informative to aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) transgene production and function. One problem with
this approach is the inadequacy of using such technology as a
dosing criterion: a sufficient signal is not expected until weeks or
months after vector is administered, making adjustments to dosing
inefficient at best, even within the flexibility of a phase 1 trial.
Due to the relative blindness of the researcher/clinician to
targeting and dosing data, the process of translating and validating clinical results from prior animal data in GT programs
has been characterized a “look-see” or trial and error approach.
While this approach can still enable iterative improvement and
therapeutic success, as demonstrated by the continued improvements to hemophilia GT treatment (discussed further below), it
is not a paradigm easily applied to all drug development endeavors. Moreover, the repeated efforts can widen the so-called “valley of death” one confronts when attempting to move a program
forward from initial, small open-label trials to the multi-center,
double-blind, sham-surgery controlled trials required to establish
efficacy. As we will point out in the next section, each of the PD
approaches described below offer vivid examples of the look-see
approach, often to the program’s detriment.

PARKINSON’S GT CLINICAL TRIALS TO DATE

To date, five divergent GT approaches have been developed to
treat the major motor symptoms of PD, all with the use of AAV or
488

lentivirus vector platforms (Table 2). Each of the clinical approaches
has focused on aspects of the basal ganglia, a group of subcortical
neural sites located near the base of the forebrain that communicate
intimately with the cerebral cortex and other brain areas. Most GT
approaches directly target the terminals of the degenerating nigrostriatal neurons for gene delivery, while one approach indirectly
attempts to resolve striatal neurochemical imbalance by increasing
inhibitory control from the subthalamic nucleus.
Three of the five PD GT approaches have attempted to ameliorate motor symptoms by altering the neurochemical conductivity
of neurons mediating the motor behavior. This general strategy
has involved delivering neurotransmitter-producing enzymes.
In a first clinical study, AAV2/GAD (adeno-associated viral vector serotype 2/glutamic acid decarboxylase (GABA), a combination of GAD-65 and GAD-67) was delivered to the subthalamic
nucleus9,10 (Figure 1b). GAD catalyzes the synthesis of gammaaminobutyric acid, the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the
CNS, potentially providing lost inhibitory control in the basal
ganglion motor system, thus restoring appropriate transynaptic balance. A second approach has attempted to improve the
ability of the putamen to synthesize dopamine from exogenous
L-Dopa (the immediate precursor for dopamine and the mainstay
therapeutic for early-stage PD) by expressing the major L-DOPAconverting enzyme AADC in the putamen. Whereas one clinical
investigation used AAV to deliver this enzyme,8 a second study
used a trisictronic (delivery of three transgenes from a single vector cassette) lenti-vector expressing AADC as well as TH and
GTP-CH1 (guanosine 5′-triphosphate cyclohydrolase1), with the
latter two enzymes also significantly contributing to dopamine’s
synthesis11 (Figure 1c).
The final two of five PD GT approaches have employed a neurotrophic factor delivery approach, which rather than directly
attempting to modulate neuronal activity, instead confer “trophic”
support to the dopaminergic and surrounding neuronal populations by inducing repair genes in activated cells12,13 (Figure 1c,e).
This offers potential improvement in symptoms as well as delay
in disease progression.5,14 Both neurotrophic GT investigations to
date have used AAV2 as the delivery vector; the studies diverge
merely in the choice of which of two structural and functional
analog proteins (neurturin (NRTN) or glia cell–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)) is packaged and expressed. Below we
offer perspective on the outcomes of each of the PD GT clinical
approaches to date.
www.moleculartherapy.org vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

Table 2 Summary of gene therapy clinical programs for Parkinson’s disease
Treatment
(approach)

Trial design

Year
began

Subject
# dosed

Highest total
dose (vg)

Target(S)

Largest volume
(µl)/site

Safety
results

Efficacy
outcomes

AAV2/GAD

Ph1-uncontrolleda

2003

12

1 × 1012

Subthal Nuc (unilat)

50

Acceptable

Advanced to Ph2

b

Ph2-double-blind

2008

22/16*

1 × 1012

Subthal Nuc (Bilat)

35

Acceptable

Mixed results;
program suspended

AAV2/
AADC

Ph1-uncontrolledc

2004

10

0.3 × 1012

Putamen (Bilat)

50

Acceptable

Program suspended;
revised Ph1 recently
announced

AAV2/
AADC

Ph1-uncontrolledd

2007

6

0.3 × 1012

Putamen (Bilat)

50

Acceptable

No further testing;
revised Ph1 recently
announced by USA
group

AAV2/
NRTN

Ph1-uncontrollede

2005

12

0.54 × 1012

Putamen (Bilat)

5(10)**

Acceptable

Advanced to Ph2

2006

38

0.54 × 1012

Putamen (Bilat)

5(10)**

Acceptable

Mixed results;
revised Ph1
designed

Ph2A-double-blind

f

2009

6

2.4 × 1012

Put + SN (Bilat)

50

Acceptable

Advanced to Ph2

h

2010

24

2.4 × 1012

Put + SN (Bilat)

50

Acceptable

Program suspended

LENTI/
AADC-THCH1

Ph1/2-uncontrolled

2008

15

Lentivirus
dosing is not
comparable to
that of AAV##

Putamen (Bilat)

Acceptable

Program suspended;
additional work
to optimize vector
ongoing

AAV2/
GDNF

Ph1-uncontrolledk

2013

Ongoing

0.7 × 1012

Putamen (Bilat)

N/A

N/A

Synopsis

Total of seven phase
1 and three phase
2 trials

2003–
2013

>139

Tested up to
1 × 1012 vg
AAV

No safety
issues or
serious side
effects noted

Efficacy outcomes
generally
disappointing

Ph1-uncontrolledg
Ph2B-double-blind

#

Targets have included
subthalamic nucleus,
putamen and SN

150
50 µl (most
common); 150
µl (largest)

AAV, adeno-associated virus; SN, substantia nigra.
a
Kaplitt et al.15. bLeWitt et al. 201116. cChristine et al.22. dMuramatsu et al. 28. eMarks et al. 40. fMarks et al. 38. gBartus et al. 39. hBartus et al. 37. Palfi et al.91 kLonser90.
*Twenty-two subjects were dosed but six were eliminated from efficacy analysis due to mistargeting of cannula. **Two 5 µl volumes infused via single needle tract
~4 mm apart. # Described as a Phase 1/2 trial, this open label (uncontrolled) study does not differ substantially from many dose-escalation Phase 1 safety studies that
include secondary efficacy endpoints; thus, the distinction appears to be more a semantic preference than a reflection of a substantial difference in study design.
##
A five-fold dose range was tested involving 3 dose levels (1.9X107 transducing units (TU); 4.0X107 TU; 1.0X108 TU).

AAV/GAD
Following publication of nonhuman efficacy and safety data10
and the successful completion of the first safety and tolerability
trial for PD GT,15 a single controlled phase 2 trial with AAV/GAD
was initiated. The trial involved 45 total subjects (roughly 50:50,
treated:sham) and was completed without serious incident.16
Several interesting protocol innovations were employed, including prescreening all subjects with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET to
help assure a definitive diagnosis of PD. While this investigation
is unique in that it achieved statistical significance on the primary
efficacy endpoint (i.e., UPDRS motor-off), which represents a significant accomplishment in its own right, the clinical effect was
described as “modest”.17 Indeed, even the significant primary endpoint produced only a 3.4-point difference on the UPDRS, part
3 scale (clinician-scored motor evaluation), compared to sham
control. Moreover, the slim statistical difference between groups
(P = 0.04) likely positively influenced by the use of a reasonable,
protocol-prescribed data analysis approach that would not meet
the more rigorous “intent to treat” standards traditionally held by
the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Specifically, five
subjects, four of whom showed no benefit on the primary endpoint, were eliminated after the trial was completed because an
Molecular Therapy vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

magnetic resonance imaging-based review of the targeting identified their injections as being off-target.16 While two other efficacy measurements (both clinical impressions rating scales) also
showed statistical significance (P < 0.05), these effects were also
quite modest (i.e., < ½ point difference), while 21 other efficacy
endpoints, including those commonly considered important for
confirming clinical benefit (e.g., PDQ-39; multiple motor diary
scores), showed no difference between groups. Thus, despite technically meeting the primary endpoint, the efficacy data from this
trial were modest at best, which likely was responsible for the
trial’s sponsor (Neurologix, Fort Lee, NJ) discontinuing the AAV/
GAD program.
In retrospect, the AAV/GAD clinical trial highlighted several
key early concerns for the PD GT field to consider: (i) whether
modest nonhuman primate efficacy data (e.g., a 1-point improvement versus control on a 32-point behavioral scale) justified moving into clinical testing, (ii) the disappointingly modest efficacy data
generated in the clinic, and (iii) the need for such high exclusion
rates of treated subjects. The latter concern hints at potential challenges in performing consistent, accurate intracranial targeting—a
concern that continues to be addressed and potentially resolved,18
albeit using real-time imaging instrumentation and methods not
489

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

a

b

c

d

e

Figure 1 Illustration of Parkinson’s disease gene therapy strategies to date.(a) In a sagittal slice of the human brain, dopaminergic pathways are
depicted projecting within various deep-brain basal ganglia structures particularly affected in Parkinson’s disease (PD), such as the substantia nigra
(SN) projecting to the striatum (STR). (b) In the first gene therapy (GT) clinical trial for PD, adeno-associated virus (AAV) carrying genes encoding
for glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), a gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-producing enzyme, were delivered to the subthalamic nucleus (STN),
to neurons projecting to, and ostensibly inhibiting hyperactive putaminal (PUT) neurons of the striatum. (c,d) The majority of PD GT clinical trials to
date, including those incorporating neurotrophic factors (NRTN, GDNF) and dopamine-producing enzymes (AADC, TH) have targeted the therapeutic vector to striatal neurons, relying on retrograde transport to the SN cell bodies to achieve maximal therapeutic response. Delivery of the therapeutic vector directly to cell bodies of the SN has been used as an alternative or complementary strategy to overcome the transport deficiences in this
pathological brain tissue in an attempt enhance therapeutic response. (e) One of the two major STR/SN gene therapy approaches involves expression
and secretion of neurotrophic factors glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) or neurturin (NRTN) in SN neurons projecting to the striatum, and
thereby attempting to repair the SN-STR dopamine pathway and restore its function. The other GT approach in this system relies on expression of
enzymes aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) or tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), each of which is involved in the synthesis of dopamine from
neurochemical substrates found in in striatum-projecting neurons.

yet available in most stereotactic surgical operating rooms. Perhaps
more importantly, even the hint of exclusionary data, regardless
of the specific circumstances, can mar the perceived integrity of
the results, and discount the apparent maturity of the field at large.
Here, the modest efficacy data may be best ascribed to modest
non-human primate findings. However, as we will examine, such
modest clinical efficacy reported in this initial trial foreshadowed
that of each subsequent clinical trial, even where preclinical studies
showed more robust results. This clinical disappointment, therefore, can best be examined in the broader context of PD GT.

AAV/AADC
Another early PD GT approach utilized AAV/AADC, which
after showing preclinical efficacy in MPTP monkeys,8 moved
into clinical testing for 15 moderately advanced subjects in an
open-label phase 1 clinical trial. The protocol for this trial was
publicly discussed at the recombinant DNA advisory committee in late 2003,19 but subjects were not treated until 1 year later,
during which time Genzyme, Boston, MA acquired the program
from Avigen (Alameda, CA).20 First, it is worth noting the success
of this trial, which like the preceding AAV/GAD study, included
preliminary evidence for safety.21,22 However, despite a reasonable
490

scientific rationale and several animal studies demonstrating
reasonably robust enhancement in nigrostriatal dopamine function with AAV2-AADC,8,23–25 the phase 1 trial found only very
modest efficacy,17,26 and was even described as neither “clear cut”
nor what “we needed” by a Genzyme spokesperson.27 A second
phase 1 study was performed in Japan using the identical vector
(provided by Genzyme) and dosing paradigm, as well as a similar clinical protocol.28 Not surprisingly, the open-label efficacy
results were not markedly different from the trial conducted in the
USA. Recently, Genzyme agreed to allow the program’s academic
originators, in collaboration with Michael J. Fox Foundation for
Parkinson’s Research (MJFF), to resurrect a modified version of
the clinical program, admitting that without the MJFF financial
support, the program would not likely have moved forward.27
The reinitiated program offers an example of the look-see
approach currently necessary for CNS GT work, which given the
10-year separation between studies, might allow for at least marginal redesign and advancement of the forthcoming study. First,
we should reexamine the overriding approach: the use of AADC
as the lynchpin of the clinical trial. Some researchers have questioned whether elevating levels of AADC is necessary or sufficient to enhance dopamine, citing either the redundancy of other
www.moleculartherapy.org vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

decarboxylases in the CNS, or the maintained functionality of
the decarboxylase activity in patients with advanced PD, who can
often still benefit from low doses of L-Dopa.29 However, the preclinical data are strikingly clear in terms of efficacy expectations,8
and recent clinical successes with AAV/AADC in a compassionate use study of AADC deficiency30 reaffirm the potential for this
transgene to restore L-Dopa conversion to dopamine in humans
(to the extent that the monogenic disease may be comparable to
the complex etiology of PD). Thus, an alternative explanation for
the lack of efficacy might be due to delivery—a more manageable hurdle. The originators of the AADC trial acknowledge that
the dosing parameters used in their initial clinical effort were
suboptimal. Specifically, the researchers noted a somewhat lacking transduction pattern in the putamen: whereas the prior dosing parameters led to 35–40% coverage of this region as a whole,
this corresponded with only 5–6% of AADC-expressing neurons
within the delivery area.25 Thus, a clear priority for the reinitiated trial will be to extend the putaminal coverage as well as the
transduced cell density, which the group expects to accomplish by
using increased vector volumes and doses.21 This solution, though
abbreviated in their discussion, merits attention: certainly using
magnetic resonance imaging-guided CED (convection-enhanced
delivery) and an increased dose should increase putaminal coverage (even to the proposed 60% goal). Further, it is conceivable that
the two separate concerns of transduction volume and density can
be resolved with CED, and increased vector concentration per volume (perhaps a far greater dose). At the same time, however, efforts
to increase volume and also increase density might represent competing goals, for as volume is increased, density will decrease (all
else being equal) and vice versa. With the steady advances in vector
development, we argue that the vector itself should also be considered a variable that can have major consequences on transduction success. For instance, AAV1 and AAV5 are more efficacious
than AAV2 in transduction of the primate substantia nigra (SN)
and caudate nucleus,31,32 and several other serotypes have shown
far superior transduction efficiency than AAV2 in rodent models,
with respect to both volume and density.33,34 Should this improved
efficiency translate to the Parkinsonian brain, it might allow for
reduction in viral dose to achieve the same or greater volume
and density of therapeutic gene expression. To the other extreme,
assuming far higher AADC levels could be achieved through any
or all of the above alternatives, one needs to consider the possibility of increased dyskinesias, as observed in monkeys with high
focal doses of AAV-AADC.35 While similar side effects have not
been reported in other nonhuman primate studies or in any of the
15 human subjects dosed a decade ago, the correlation between
bioactivity in animal models and human studies remains uncertain and a potential problem might reemerge with the proposed
changes in CED parameters and dose. The side effects reported
when AAV-GDNF was delivered to the SN (and beyond) using
aggressive CED parameters in nonhuman primates18 provides
a clear, empirical example for why one should be cautious about
unexpected outcomes when dosing parameters are adjusted to
significantly increase spread of vector or protein. Importantly, neither the spread of protein far outside the targeted SN, nor the side
effects reported with aggressive CED were seen in animal studies36
or clinical tests in PD patients37 when somewhat more moderate
Molecular Therapy vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

dosing parameters were employed, involving more modest CED in
conjunction with multiple, distributed injection sites.
So what is the greater context of the original and pending follow-up study? The degree by which the reiterated trial digresses
and improves upon the original study will be vitally significant for
the CNS GT field as a whole, where with each clinical setback the
stakes are raised ever higher for this still-fledgling field. As with
many emerging technologies, simultaneous advances are likely
required, such as improved vectors, more representative animal
models, more pointed clinical methodology that can detect negative outcomes, and a backdrop of supportive funding mechanisms.

Lenti-AADC/TH/GTP-CH1
Following publication of efficacy results in nonhuman primates
with the trisictronic lenti-vector expressing three enzymes involved
in dopamine production,11 an uncontrolled, open label, dose-­
escalation study was conducted in 15 PD subjects. Three ascending doses were tested, involving a 5-fold dose range. Like the
‘look-see’ approach applied by others, significant adjustments were
made to the dosing parameters (e.g., needle tracts per hemisphere
were reduced from 5 to 3; infusions per needle tract were reduced
from several to one; infusion rate was increased from 1 µl/min
to 3 µl /min) in the middle of the protocol. The safety profile
looked favorable, with most adverse events being mild and deemed
unrelated to treatment. Dose-related increases in dyskinesias
reportedly resolved when the L-dopa dose was lowered. Modest
improvements (from baseline) in UPDRS-motor off scores were
seen at 6 and 12 months, roughly comparable to that seen in prior
GT phase 1 studies. The authors concluded that they applied an
iterative process in this trial to try to optimize delivery and that a
more definitive double-blind placebo controlled trial will not be
conducted until they are able to achieve an optimal dose and delivery mode, presumably requiring further dosing iterations.
AAV/NRTN (CERE-120)
This first trophic factor approach to PD GT has seen two phase 2
trials conducted to date,38, 39, 41 each preceded by the completion of
an appropriate open-label phase 1 trial,37,40 as well as an extensive
nonclinical program before that.5,36,41,42 The efficacy data for both
phase 2 trials were mixed and disappointing, in that neither met
the primary endpoint (UPDRS motor-off) within the prescribed
timeframe. Notably, in the initial phase 2 trial, improvement in
the primary clinical endpoint was seen beyond the prescribed
assessment time (i.e., 15–18 months versus the prescribed 12
months), offering a surprisingly positive twist to the study’s initial
disappointment. Additionally, several other motor and quality-­
of-life endpoints achieved statistical significance at the study’s primary, 12 months time point. Moreover, of the ~50% subjects who
remained blinded beyond the 12 months timeframe, a statistically
significant effect was also seen on the primary endpoint, as well as
even more secondary endpoints.37 Also, an exploratory statistical
analysis indicated that the differences between AAV/NRTN and
sham-surgery were highly unlikely to have occurred by chance (P
< 0.007 and P < 0.001 at 12 and 18 months, respectively).5,41
As a perfect example of the look-see paradigm, following additional nonclinical testing,36,42 a follow-up phase 1/2b protocol was
designed to improve efficacy by incorporating several important
491

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

changes, such as increasing dose and volume of the vector to the
putamen, additional targeting of the SN directly, and extending the
blinded assessment period by several months5; all of these changes
were confirmed in animal models to likely improve the biological
response to AAV2-NRTN.36,42 Still, the resulting double-blind, controlled phase 2 trial also failed to show statistical significance on the
primary endpoint.39 Thus, these results and the AAV/NRTN trial
joined the ranks of the preceding phase 2 PD GT trials16,38 in falling
far short of what was required to proceed into phase 3 testing.
Again, as we ask the major question of why greater efficacy was
not achieved, we return to the issue of delivery. Here, however, the
issue perhaps diverges from the previously entertained concern of
putaminal coverage, to one of ineffective therapeutic gene transport
in the pathological brain tissue. Certainly, one question posed by
investigators is whether increasing putaminal coverage of vector
and therefore NRTN transgene would be sufficient to improve efficacy. While it is hard to argue against this rationale at face value, a
better question is exactly how much transgene expression has been
successfully produced previously, and how much is necessary for
impact. Recent reexamination of autopsy specimen place estimates
of putaminal coverage by NRTN at around 20%,37,43 which due to
NRTN-antibody limitations, is likely underestimated.5,44 Perhaps
more importantly, and getting to the second concern of brain transport, the more recent phase 2b trial increased the NRTN dose by
three- to fourfold and increased the volume per injection by 10-fold
in the putamen alone. Additionally, a sizable dose was injected
directly into the degenerating cells in the SN in an effort to assure
adequate NRTN coverage of cells bodies to help activate repair
pathways in these neurons. Together, these changes should have
significantly increased NRTN expression and bioactivity events
confirmed in animal studies36,42 (though no autopsy tissue is yet
available from this study for confirmation); yet the clinical results
were still not sufficiently robust. Conversely, in primate MPTP and
advanced-age primate models of PD, significant neuronal protection and restoration was achieved with putaminal coverage well
below 10% coverage.45,46 Thus, whether the extent of putaminal
coverage by vector is the major factor in achieving robust clinical
improvement is unclear, for neither that nor the addition of targeting the SN was sufficient to enhance the clinical readout. These data
warn that merely improving blanket gene delivery coverage may
not hold the key to achieving a desired outcome.
If vector transduction alone is not a major concern, what else
might account for the lack of efficacy? One possibility has to do with
the degenerative state of PD, and how this may affect therapeutic
protein transport through brain circuits. With regard to AAV/
NRTN, one possibility is the serious deficiency of axonal transport
in PD patients. Such deficiencies have been posited as a major reason why, despite areas of intense NRTN expression in the targeted
putamen, little NRTN was seen at the distal SN, where the protein
product was intended to be transported to achieve a robust neurotrophic response.37,39,43,44 The topographic relationships between
SN neurons and their putaminal projection fibers predicates that
even a small area of protein expression in the putamen should
produce a proportional area of detectable protein in the SN—a
finding confirmed in several nonhuman primate studies with AAVNRTN.44 However, as very little NRTN was seen in the SN of the
PD autopsy tissue, it appeared that neuronal pathology in the aged
492

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

human PD brain was more severe than that of animal models, preventing NRTN transport from the putamen to the SN. Aside from
axonal transport (and related axonopathy) concerns, other pathologies may also diminish the anticipated effect of neurotrophic factor support, even in consideration of direct targeting to the SN cell
bodies. For instance, α-synuclein (a protein whose accumulation
in dopamine neurons serves as a major pathogenic event in PD)
can mediate downregulation of the transcription factor Nurr1 and
its downstream target, the GDNF/NRTN RET receptor,47–49 directly
mitigating GDNF/NRTN signaling, and thus impeding the therapeutic outcome from occurring. These summations strongly argue
for animal models that better reflect multiple elements of the clinical
condition (e.g., varying degrees of axonopathy, including persistent
axonal dysfunction in currently surviving neurons) and/or recruiting less severely advanced patients, which may retain better transport and less-pathological antineurotrophic molecular cascades.

AAV/GDNF
The questions raised by the AAV/NRTN program and clinical
trials are directly pertinent to this nascent clinical program, for
despite differential developmental expression profiles,50 supraphysiological levels of GDNF and NRTN produce virtually indistinguishable in vivo efficacy profiles.51,52 Therefore, given the same
testing conditions and dosing parameters, expectations that substituting one protein for the other alone will produce a sufficiently
different clinical outcome are most likely to disappoint. The investigators pursuing the AAV/GDNF clinical trial could perhaps be
adopting a look-see approach by improving upon key aspects of
past studies (namely AAV/NRTN). As such, one strategy includes
expansion upon putaminal coverage volume via more aggressive
CED. This strategy follows the “improved delivery” logic, and is
thus prone to the same pitfalls as many past efforts in PD GT.
Simply increasing putaminal coverage of GDNF as a sole means
to enhance efficacy in the clinic ignores the concerns of compromised axonal transport, for instance. It also overlooks concerns
of α-synuclein accumulation on dampening GDNF signaling.47–49
Either or both of these factors may account for the higher responsivity in earlier versus later-stage subjects in the second AAV/
NRTN phase 2 study39 and are not apparently being accounted
for in the nascent AAV2/GDNF protocol. Thus, the AAV/GDNF
study in many ways mirrors the past AAV/NRTN studies (but
without clear attempts to circumvent transport deficiencies by
directly targeting the SN). Thus, without significant further innovation, we worry that this latest clinical endeavor may be relying
too heavily on incremental delivery enhancement as the primary
means to achieve a substantially superior clinical outcome.

HOW FAR HAVE WE COME?

Now a full decade after the first clinical testing of PD GT began,
the disappointments can overshadow the successes. Yet, the collective successes are both important and concrete, and are precisely what the next decade of PD GT research will move forward
from: safety, controllability, and quality manufacturing.

Safety of CNS GT
Just a decade ago, when the first PD GT clinical trial was being
launched, safety of CNS GT was the major concern to many
www.moleculartherapy.org vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

investigators and nearly all regulatory agencies, investors, and
potential Pharma industry partners. However, over the past 10
years, these issues have largely evaporated, in no small part due to
the contributions of the programs reviewed in this paper. Despite
numerous concerns on nearly everyone’s minds, none of the trials noted any troubling safety problems; the most consistent AEs
(adverse events) reported for all the studies were related to the
stereotactic surgical procedure and those were similar to what has
been accepted as tolerable for deep brain stimulation, a stereotactic surgical procedure for PD long-since approved by European
regulatory agencies and the FDA. Conversely, all three phase 2 PD
studies observed a substantial placebo response (i.e., improvement
from baseline in the sham control group), thus indirectly verifying
the safety of stereotactic administration of GT products into the
brain.16,38,39,53
The CNS GT approach itself can also be deemed as safe—data
from the PD GT trials to date show a remarkably clean safety profile, with none of the problems seen when non-GT methods have
been used in an attempt to provide chronic, exogenous bioactive
protein (e.g., protein aggregation, loss of bioactivity, induction of
neutralizing antibodies, etc.) In fact, the safety record for PD GT
collectively appears more favorable than several prior approaches
intended to deliver chronic protein for human neurodegenerative diseases (e.g., NGF for Alzheimer’s; GDNF and fetal tissue
transplantation for PD), in that far fewer serious adverse events
have been noted in the GT studies compared to the competing
delivery approaches.54–59 Another concern in the field a decade ago
involved the potential impact of preexisting neutralizing antibodies (nAbs) to viral vectors (e.g., AAV, for which humans can have
measurable titers). However, with regard to the brain, nAbs so
far appear to be inconsequential towards any local inflammatory
reaction, transgene expression, or long-term bioactivity.5 Lastly,
the need to regulate protein expression in a safe and effective
manner, or even shut down expression completely if serious safety
issues arise, was a safety issue raised by select researchers. To date,
there have been no adverse effects of chronic expression, and
regulatory control appears to be more an incremental enhancement than an absolute necessity. However, as doses and transduction overall are increased through improved targeting (e.g., the
reinitiated AAV/AADC trial) and/or vector design, the need for
a regulatable vector may reemerge as an important consideration.
Thus, GT in the context of PD has proven it to be among the safest
approaches developed for long-term, targeted delivery of proteins
to the brain—a benchmark that has shifted safety assumptions for
the GT field as a whole.

Controlled and predictable bioactive protein
expression
The PD clinical trials have also generated convincing evidence that
GT can meet its most important objective: providing the means to
achieve chronically controlled and predictable bioactive protein
expression, targeted to specific brain sites in animals and human
patients. In animal studies, clear dose–response relationships have
been established in both rats and monkeys52,60,61 demonstrating
the ability to control amount of protein production and volume of
expression by manipulating vector genome dose. Moreover, longterm, targeted expression of biologically active protein has been
Molecular Therapy vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

achieved following a single administration of the vector in rats
for at least 4–5 months for GAD,9 and 20 months for NRTN.62
In nonhuman primates, this has been established for at least 56
weeks for GAD,10 1-year for NRTN,61 6–8 years for AADC.25,35
While human expression data are more limited, long-term, bioactive protein expression has nonetheless been confirmed for over 4
years for both AAV-AADC, using a PET imaging surrogate21 and
more directly for AAV-NRTN, demonstrating long-term biologically active protein expression via immunohistochemistry in tissue from postmortem brains of previously treated subjects.39

Manufacturing
Advances in process development and manufacturing have made
it possible to produce sufficient current good manufacturing practice) quantities of vector in a cost-effective manner to supply multicenter clinical trials as well as product commercialization; thus,
cost-of-goods is no longer the impediment to commercialization
that it was viewed to be by many just a decade ago. As described
in better detail elsewhere,63 one of the great successes in the past
decade has been the scalability of vector production, from the
original plated HEK293 cell production without the addition of
helper virus,64 to the current suspension culture methods,63 baculovirus expression vector systems (e.g.,),65 HSV-based production systems66 and others, with possible titer generation upwards
of 1 × 1014 viral genomes per liter of cells. Coupled with the high
purity of ion-exchange chromatography, and current good manufacturing practice realization through vector core facilities, vector
production can be fast, reliable, highly pure, and affordable.

WHERE DO WE GO NEXT?

In sum, the progress achieved over the past decade with the PD
GT programs and their clinical trials has created the irony that GT
has worked as it was designed but not as intended. That is, despite
successfully providing safely targeted and controlled bioactive
protein for very long periods of time in both animal and human
brain, the efficacy data generated in the PD clinical trials did not
demonstrate sufficiently robust or consistent benefits to patients,
compared to that achieved by placebo controls.

Is PD the disease to bank our CNS GT expectations
on?
A fundamental question that has emerged following completion
of the nine PD trials is whether this disease presents too great
a challenge to continue to promote as a prototype platform for
launching GT as a transformative approach for broadly treating
CNS diseases. PD is recognized to be an extremely complex disease involving many different genetic and environmental etiologic and pathologic variables (Table 1), as well as degeneration
of many nondopaminergic and nonmotor systems,3,67 for which
the cause-effect relationships are incompletely understood, making the success of any novel interventional approach less certain.
Even if we focus narrowly on the continued need for better treatment for the motor impairments, significant practical challenges
complicate that endeavor. Some of the most grievous challenges
include the heavy reliance on highly subjective and variable clinical assessment tools, the lack of validated biomarkers or clearly
effective/predictive surrogate measures (attempts to use PET
493

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

imaging notwithstanding), high variability in degree and scope
of individual-patient symptoms from day to day and even hour
to hour, the large but variable placebo response often seen in PD
trials, and concerns regarding the predictive validity of currently
used animal models. To this last point, the fact that most of the
GT PD program produced clear evidence for robust, positive data
in the most widely accepted animal models used for PD and yet
failed to replicate the magnitude or consistency of these effects in
PD patients, necessarily raises a question of whether the predictive validity of these models is sufficient for establishing nonclinical proof of concept (see Table 1).
These difficulties in mind, would the CNS GT community find
greater opportunity for growth and success in focusing on alternative diseases? Finding a model disease with which to launch a
sea change in CNS GT has been notoriously challenging. Some of
the ongoing CNS GT efforts include lysosomal storage diseases,
leukodystrophies, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer’s, epilepsies, and cancers. A cursory evaluation of these diseases and
their treatment hints at both unique and familiar challenges. A
key divergent challenge has been vector targeting issues: some
CNS diseases, including lysosomal storage diseases and leukodystrophies warrant nonneuronal cell transduction and/or
global CNS delivery, neither of which has been adequately realized with current technology. Some of the convergent challenges
include matching the predictive ability of animal models to clinical success. With amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, for instance, the
commonly used SOD1 mouse line has benefited from preclinical successes (e.g.,),68 which translated poorly in humans, where
patients in the treatment group actually deteriorated more rapidly.69 Disease complexity is not unfamiliar to the Alzheimer’s or
epilepsy fields, which may benefit most directly from the specific
growing pains and lessons of PD GT.

Improving our odds of success
Are we overlooking accessible means of reaching heightened clinical success with PD GT? Two of the major concerns highlighted
in the PD GT trials included weak transduction and likely protein
product transport issues in the pathological brain tissue. As discussed earlier, in addition to improved delivery technologies such
as CED, there are foreseeable advantages of alternating the vector serotype or using engineered vectors to improve transduction
directly, rather than resorting simply to higher vector dosing and
infusion volumes. The perceived challenge here is in the resources
required to obtain regulatory approval for using unique viral entities, whereas this hurdle has long been cleared for AAV2. Recent
discussions to streamline the regulatory process for newly developed vectors are formalizing and hopefully may clear a path for
improved vector usage in the clinic.70 Regarding the challenges of
the pathology itself, if the degenerative state were a major obstacle for therapy, would earlier treatment not be more efficient and
potentially successful? A recent exploratory analysis of the AAV2NRTN phase 2b data suggests so: in the study earlier-stage PD subjects (defined here as those 5 or fewer years postdiagnosis) showed
much greater clinical benefit from AAV-NRTN than did those
treated at 10 or more years postdiagnosis.39 This elevates the ageold issue in the neurodegeneration field, particularly with regard to
neurotrophic factor intervention, regarding whether earlier-stage
494

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

patients might indeed respond far better and more reliably than
those currently enrolled in experimental treatments. Thus, two
questions emerge that will command significant research and
regulatory attention going forward: how quickly dying neurons
reach an irreversibly degenerated state,71 and how early in the disease process experimental treatments will be warranted in patient
volunteers.39 Progress in clinical biomarker research (such as that
recently described)72 will undoubtedly shape the earlier intervention efforts and may even help establish surrogate endpoints to
permit a more biometrically equilibrated scoring system (Table 3).

Seeking alternative animal models
In light of the consistent disconnect between preclinical and clinical successes in PD GT, a step back from the clinic might reenvision the problem of delivery to one of predictive power of animal
models. The overreliance on acute toxin-based PD models (e.g.,
the everpopular 6-OHDA and MPTP models) limits our exploration of treatment options and models that encompass more of the
pathogenic variables (Table 1) with less focus on limited pathologic or behavioral changes may yield both conventional and
biomolecular alternatives. One paradigm gaining momentum is
that focusing on the pathological sequelae of α-synuclein overexpression (aggregation of which is a key pathogenic event in PD),
which can result in the death of the mid-brain dopamine neurons
affected in PD.47,48,73–76 Perhaps most valuable with regard to GT
shortcomings to date is the observation that overexpression of
α-synuclein in rats leads to axonal transport deficits and gradual
dysfunction of dopamine processes prior to frank cell death, a
process akin to that described in PD.73 Moreover, these increased
levels of α-synuclein can inhibit the ability of GDNF to protect
degenerating dopamine neurons, ostensibly through downregulation of the transcription factor Nurr1 and its downstream target, RET—the GDNF receptor.47,48,75 By inference, such findings
provide a putative basis respectively for challenges of retrograde
GT transport and neurotrophic factor bioactivity. This model
involving overexpression of α-synuclein is still far from fully
characterized and is certain to be an incomplete representation
of the disease. It is already clear that the protein overexpression
required to induce the PD-like pathology far surpasses human
pathological levels, while the focus on a singular molecular moiety recapitulates a strategy that has ensnared the Alzheimer’s field
for years (i.e., β-amyloid transgenics). Nonetheless, progress at the
preclinical level, even discoveries well within reach, may provide
robust opportunities for substantially increasing the momentum
for research and development in GT.
Reaching across the aisle
From regulatory hurdles, to endpoints and even overarching trial
design, the conventional pharmaceutical approach to treating
PD might seem fully distinct from GT efforts, but yet a solution
may come from aligning our strengths—achieving a sum greater
than the parts. Where the conventional and GT-based approaches
have already been linked to some extent through the prodrug
strategy (i.e., AADC—enhancing the therapeutic benefit of oral
levodopa treatment) this complementation could seemingly
extend beyond the prodrug scenario; as examples, α-synuclein
aggregation inhibitors could improve retrograde vector transport,
www.moleculartherapy.org vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

Table 3 Resolving key obstacles to facilitate new Parkinson’s disease therapies
Obstacle/challenge

Impact on clinical tests

Significant variability in patient’s
symptoms

Greatly increases “noise”,
reducing probability of
detecting genuine benefit

Near-term focus: Develop objective, clinically-meaningful, validated, “at-home”
measuring tools for routine, repetitive testing to complement existing clinical tools

Standard clinical assessment tools are
suboptimal; e.g., highly subjective;
variable from rater-to-rater; prone to
significant rater (clinical) bias

Introduces variability,
reducing probability of
detecting benefit

Near-term focus: Rely more on improved at-home assessments to complement clinical
tools (above)

Lack of reliable, objective, validated
biomarkers, and surrogate endpoints

Exclusive dependence
on subjective clinical
endpoints (above)

Near- and longer-term focus: Continue concerted research effort (e.g., MJFF
“Parkinson’s progressive markers initiative”) to identify objective biomarkers that can
be used to define subpopulations of patients; Also, utilize these biomarkers to identify
earlier-stage patients, and as surrogate end-points

Animal models lack predictive value

Reduces ability to refine
or objectively select
treatments to test in
humans

 ith exception of dopamine synaptic
W
modulators, they have universally been
ineffective in predicting outcomes in
Parkinson’s disease clinic

Increases risk that
treatment will fail in
clinical trial

Near and longer-term focus: Develop models that (1) incorporate more of the
pathogenic events of Parkinson’s disease; (2) attempt to match magnitude of
these pathogenic events to Parkinson’s disease and provide temporal windows for
intervention throughout the pathology; (3) move away from univariate models in favor
of multi-variate models; (4) incorporate aging as a major covariate; and (5) manifest
persistent (steady-state), intraneuronal dysfunctions

 agnitude and scope vary from hour-toM
hour and day-to-day, rendering scheduled
clinical assessments mere “semirandom”
snapshots of patient’s status

Possible path toward a solution

Longer-term focus: Develop more objective clinical assessment tools

supporting superior nigrostriatal transduction, or Nurr1 agonists
could potentiate the effects of neurotrophic factors like NRTN and
GDNF. A further envisioning of GT for use in conjunction other
nonconventional therapies, such as deep brain stimulation, seems
reasonable at a regulatory level (perhaps requiring little additional
surgical intervention to achieve both vector delivery and electrode
implantation), and might be an outside strategy for achieving the
next critical victory in PD GT.

What can we learn from the history of novel
therapeutics?
The history surrounding the development of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) into the powerful biopharmaceuticals they have now
become provides a comparative perspective regarding the current
status of PD GT. With the early fervor over mAbs in the 1980s to
early 90s, one company (Janssen Biotech, Horsham, Pennsylvania)
spent years of intense effort and hundreds of millions of dollars77
developing its lead mAb product, nebacumab or Centoxin, to
treat sepsis. However, following promising data in animal models
and even some approvals in Europe for other indications, a pivotal
trial failed miserably.78 Centocor’s first mAb approval (infliximab;
Remicade), initially for Crohn’s disease and later for rheumatoid
arthritis, was not achieved until 6 years after the Centoxin/sepsis failure, but now enjoys extremely high success both clinically
and financially,79 and is just one of nearly 30 different mAb drugs
contributing to one of the fastest growing therapeutic areas in biotech.80 This example, and many others involving similarly novel,
transformational biomedical technologies (e.g., antisense technology,81 informs us that the types of disappointments seen with GT
for PD can absolutely precede major successes, but that such an
about-face requires a renewed approach, avoiding the same miscalculations made previously.
Molecular Therapy vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

Bearing in mind the clear differences between CNS and peripheral targets for GT, the successes in a sister program—namely
hemophilia B—should still serve as a valuable model for PD GT
researchers. Here, the look-see effect that has proven something of
an impediment to PD innovation has been the mainstay component that has allowed for gradual, real progress. To distill a tremendous amount of work for the purposes of example, hemophilia GT
saw major preclinical successes, such as AAV-mediated recovery of
clotting function in Factor IX (FIX)-deficient dogs,82,83 lead to an
unanticipated lack of secreted protein product in humans,84 followed by a shift in preclinical vector targeting from muscle to liver,
which, when returned to the clinic led to a short-lived therapeutic
benefit,85 again not anticipated from the animal models. With the
advent of a higher efficacy vector (i.e., self-complementary AAV),86
codon-optimized genes,87 and testing of more efficacious vectors
(i.e., AAV8 for improved liver transduction),87 a recent clinical trial
benefited by long-term (albeit low) gene delivery.88 Now using a further optimized point mutant of FIX with sevenfold higher activity, a
clinical trial is ongoing.89 Of course, the monogenic nature of hemophilia B, versus the far more complex etiology of PD, has narrowed
the prior field’s efforts toward improving delivery and persistence,
largely avoiding the key challenge of transgene appropriateness.
Still, even in the hemophilia GT arena, there clearly continues to be
a need for iteration and continuity between bench and clinic, and
this serves as proof that the look-see approach can work with perseverance, further innovation and continuing resources.

PARTING THOUGHTS

Without proper reflection, the generally disappointing efficacy
data generated in the PD GT clinical trials might easily overshadow the significant progress that has been achieved in these
same studies. Over the course of translating animal studies into
495

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

clinic trials, these programs helped transform the entire field of
GT. They established that GT could be accurately targeted to the
brain in a safe and effective manner, that the viral vector is able to
induce neurons to produce controlled and predictable protein for
years, and that biological responses can be induced in degenerating
neuronal systems in human brains. While it is true that the clinical efficacy achieved to date is not nearly as robust or reliable as
required, it is also true that each of the three completed controlled
studies has nonetheless produced some evidence for a clinical
benefit exceeding that achieved by sham procedure. The fact that
the GT approaches to PD worked as designed but did not achieve
the magnitude of clinical benefit intended casts caution towards
the hurried repetition of modestly-altered procedures, and may
warrant a retargeting of the PD GT trajectory, starting back at the
laboratory bench. Solid victories, akin to those won over safety
and longevity concerns, are the key to continued momentum.
Given the therapeutic power that biopharmaceuticals are beginning to show and the value that GT has yielded with regards to its
ability to provide safe and effective delivery of proteins, with cautious continuity it is not hard to imagine that GT will be an important contributor and benefactor of more effective treatments for
PD and other CNS diseases. In the meantime, questions will and
should be raised about the best ways to move forward. For PD
specifically, a near-term focus on developing more effective tools
for measuring motor performance in people with PD would likely
provide many tangible benefits for trial design and execution, as
would the development of biomarkers and surrogate endpoints.
Moreover, the development of more sophisticated animal models that focus on key pathogenic events rather than symptoms or
univariate end-stage pathologies will likely yield improvements in
these models’ predictive value for GT intervention.
The glass is half full. Attending to these important considerations and implementing the lessons of our past we can reach the
success we all envision, and advance the field ever forward.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants
2R01AI072176 and 5R01AI080726 (R.J.S.) and F32NS070356 (M.S.W).

References
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

9.

Olanow, CW, Stern, MB and Sethi, K (2009). The scientific and clinical basis for the
treatment of Parkinson disease (2009). Neurology 72 (suppl. 4): S1–136.
Bonnet, AM, Jutras, MF, Czernecki, V, Corvol, JC and Vidailhet, M (2012). Nonmotor
symptoms in Parkinson’s disease in 2012: relevant clinical aspects. Parkinsons Dis
2012: 198316.
Braak, H, Del Tredici, K, Rüb, U, de Vos, RA, Jansen Steur, EN and Braak, E (2003).
Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 24:
197–211.
Parkinson’s Disease Foundation (2013). Statistics on Parkinson’s. http://www.pdf.org/
en/parkinson_statistics.
Bartus, RT (2012). Translating the therapeutic potential of neurotrophic factors to
clinical ‘proof of concept’: a personal saga achieving a career-long quest. Neurobiol Dis
48: 153–178.
Szerlip, NJ, Walbridge, S, Yang, L, Morrison, PF, Degen, JW, Jarrell, ST et al. (2007).
Real-time imaging of convection-enhanced delivery of viruses and virus-sized particles.
J Neurosurg 107: 560–567.
Fiandaca, MS, Varenika, V, Eberling, J, McKnight, T, Bringas, J, Pivirotto, P et al. (2009).
Real-time MR imaging of adeno-associated viral vector delivery to the primate brain.
Neuroimage 47 (suppl. 2): T27–T35.
Bankiewicz, KS, Eberling, JL, Kohutnicka, M, Jagust, W, Pivirotto, P, Bringas, J et al.
(2000). Convection-enhanced delivery of AAV vector in parkinsonian monkeys; in vivo
detection of gene expression and restoration of dopaminergic function using prodrug approach. Exp Neurol 164: 2–14.
Luo, J, Kaplitt, MG, Fitzsimons, HL, Zuzga, DS, Liu, Y, Oshinsky, ML et al. (2002).
Subthalamic GAD gene therapy in a Parkinson’s disease rat model. Science 298:
425–429.

496

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

10. Emborg, ME, Carbon, M, Holden, JE, During, MJ, Ma, Y, Tang, C et al. (2007).
Subthalamic glutamic acid decarboxylase gene therapy: changes in motor function
and cortical metabolism. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27: 501–509.
11. Jarraya, B, Boulet, S, Ralph, GS, Jan, C, Bonvento, G, Azzouz, M et al. (2009).
Dopamine gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease in a nonhuman primate without
associated dyskinesia. Sci Transl Med 1: 2ra4.
12. Aron, L and Klein, R (2011). Repairing the parkinsonian brain with neurotrophic
factors. Trends Neurosci 34: 88–100.
13. Peterson, AL and Nutt, JG (2008). Treatment of Parkinson’s disease with trophic
factors. Neurotherapeutics 5: 270–280.
14. Kells, AP, Eberling, J, Su, X, Pivirotto, P, Bringas, J, Hadaczek, P et al. (2010).
Regeneration of the MPTP-lesioned dopaminergic system after convection-enhanced
delivery of AAV2-GDNF. J Neurosci 30: 9567–9577.
15. Kaplitt, MG, Feigin, A, Tang, C, Fitzsimons, HL, Mattis, P, Lawlor, PA et al. (2007).
Safety and tolerability of gene therapy with an adeno-associated virus (AAV) borne
GAD gene for Parkinson’s disease: an open label, phase I trial. Lancet 369: 2097–2105.
16. LeWitt, PA, Rezai, AR, Leehey, MA, Ojemann, SG, Flaherty, AW, Eskandar, EN et al.
(2011). AAV2-GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind,
sham-surgery controlled, randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 10: 309–319.
17. Coune, PG, Schneider, BL and Aebischer, P (2012). Parkinson’s disease: gene
therapies. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2: a009431.
18. Su, X, Kells, AP, Huang, EJ, Lee, HS, Hadaczek, P, Beyer, J et al. (2009). Safety
evaluation of AAV2-GDNF gene transfer into the dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway
in aged and parkinsonian rhesus monkeys. Hum Gene Ther 20: 1627–1640.
19. Pierce, G (2003). A phase 1 open-label safety study of intrastriatal infusion of
adeno-associated virus encoding human aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AAVhAADC-2) in subjects with advanced parkinson’s disease [AAV-hAADC-2-003]. NIH
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee-Appendix M.
20. Avigen (2005). Genzyme Acquires Significant Portion of Avigen’s Gene Therapy
Technology. 21 December 2005 Press Release.
21. Mittermeyer, G, Christine, CW, Rosenbluth, KH, Baker, SL, Starr, P, Larson, P et
al. (2012). Long-term evaluation of a phase 1 study of AADC gene therapy for
Parkinson’s disease. Hum Gene Ther 23: 377–381.
22. Christine, CW, Starr, PA, Larson, PS, Eberling, JL, Jagust, WJ, Hawkins, RA et al. (2009).
Safety and tolerability of putaminal AADC gene therapy for Parkinson disease.
Neurology 73: 1662–1669.
23. Bankiewicz, KS, Forsayeth, J, Eberling, JL, Sanchez-Pernaute, R, Pivirotto, P, Bringas, J
et al. (2006). Long-term clinical improvement in MPTP-lesioned primates after gene
therapy with AAV-hAADC. Mol Ther 14: 564–570.
24. Forsayeth, JR, Eberling, JL, Sanftner, LM, Zhen, Z, Pivirotto, P, Bringas, J et al. (2006).
A dose-ranging study of AAV-hAADC therapy in Parkinsonian monkeys. Mol Ther 14:
571–577.
25. Hadaczek, P, Eberling, JL, Pivirotto, P, Bringas, J, Forsayeth, J and Bankiewicz, KS
(2010). Eight years of clinical improvement in MPTP-lesioned primates after gene
therapy with AAV2-hAADC. Mol Ther 18: 1458–1461.
26. Bjorklund, T and Kordower, JH (2010). Gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease.
Mov Disord 25 (suppl. 1): S161–S173.
27. Herpich, N (2013). Novel partnership between academia and industry drives forward
gene therapy approach to treat Parkinson’s. FoxFeed Blog: http://www.michaeljfox.
org/foundation/news-detail.php?novel-partnership-between-academia-and-industrydrives-forward-gene-therapy-approach-to-treat-parkinson.
28. Muramatsu, S, Fujimoto, K, Kato, S, Mizukami, H, Asari, S, Ikeguchi, K et al. (2010).
A phase I study of aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase gene therapy for Parkinson’s
disease. Mol Ther 18: 1731–1735.
29. Denyer, R and Douglas, MR (2012). Gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease.
Parkinsons Dis 2012: 757305.
30. Hwu, WL, Muramatsu, S, Tseng, SH, Tzen, KY, Lee, NC, Chien, YH et al. (2012).
Gene therapy for aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency. Sci Transl Med 4:
134ra61.
31. Markakis, EA, Vives, KP, Bober, J, Leichtle, S, Leranth, C, Beecham, J et al. (2010).
Comparative transduction efficiency of AAV vector serotypes 1-6 in the substantia
nigra and striatum of the primate brain. Mol Ther 18: 588–593.
32. Weinberg, MS, Samulski, RJ and McCown, TJ (2013). Adeno-associated virus (AAV)
gene therapy for neurological disease. Neuropharmacology 69: 82–88.
33. Harding, TC, Dickinson, PJ, Roberts, BN, Yendluri, S, Gonzalez-Edick, M, Lecouteur, RA
et al. (2006). Enhanced gene transfer efficiency in the murine striatum and an
orthotopic glioblastoma tumor model, using AAV-7- and AAV-8-pseudotyped vectors.
Hum Gene Ther 17: 807–820.
34. Klein, RL, Dayton, RD, Tatom, JB, Henderson, KM and Henning, PP (2008). AAV8, 9,
Rh10, Rh43 vector gene transfer in the rat brain: effects of serotype, promoter and
purification method. Mol Ther 16: 89–96.
35. Bankiewicz, KS, Daadi, M, Pivirotto, P, Bringas, J, Sanftner, L, Cunningham, J et al.
(2006). Focal striatal dopamine may potentiate dyskinesias in parkinsonian monkeys.
Exp Neurol 197: 363–372.
36. Bartus, RT, Brown, L, Wilson, A, Kruegel, B, Siffert, J, Johnson, EM Jr et al. (2011).
Properly scaled and targeted AAV2-NRTN (neurturin) to the substantia nigra is safe,
effective and causes no weight loss: support for nigral targeting in Parkinson’s disease.
Neurobiol Dis 44: 38–52.
37. Bartus, R, Baumann, TL, Siffert, J, Herzog, CD, Alterman, R, Boulis, N et al (2013).
Safety/feasibility of targeting the substantia nigra with AAV2-neurturin in Parkinson’s
patients. Neurology, 80: 1698–1702.
38. Marks, WJ Jr, Bartus, RT, Siffert, J, Davis, CS, Lozano, A, Boulis, N et al. (2010). Gene
delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind, randomised,
controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 9: 1164–1172.
39. Bartus, R (2013). CERE-120 (AAV-neurturin) for the Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease:
Experience from 4 Clinical Trials and Human Autopsy Data. American Society of Gene
and Cell Therapy 16th Annual Meeting: Salt Palace Convention Center in Salt Lake
City, Utah, USA.

www.moleculartherapy.org vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

© The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

40. Marks, WJ Jr, Ostrem, JL, Verhagen, L, Starr, PA, Larson, PS, Bakay, RA et al. (2008).
Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal delivery of CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus
serotype 2-neurturin) to patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: an open-label,
phase I trial. Lancet Neurol 7: 400–408.
41. Bartus, RT, Baumann, TL, Brown, L, Kruegel, BR, Ostrove, JM and Herzog, CD (2013).
Advancing neurotrophic factors as treatments for age-related neurodegenerative
diseases: developing and demonstrating “clinical proof-of-concept” for AAV-neurturin
(CERE-120) in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 34: 35–61.
42. Herzog, CD, Brown, L, Kruegel, BR, Wilson, A, Tansey, MG, Gage, FH et al. (2013).
Enhanced neurotrophic distribution, cell signaling and neuroprotection following
substantia nigral versus striatal delivery of AAV2-NRTN (CERE-120). Neurobiol Dis 58:
38–48.
43. Herzog, CD, Brown, L, Chu, Y, Baumann, T, Kordower, JH, Bartus, RT. Robust, stable,
targeted, long-term neurturin expression and enhanced tyosine hyroxylase labeling in
Parkinson’s disease brain 4 years following delivery of CERE-120 (AAV2-neurturin) to
the human putamen. Society for Neuroscience: New Orleans, LA, 2012.
44. Bartus, RT, Herzog, CD, Chu, Y, Wilson, A, Brown, L, Siffert, J et al. (2011). Bioactivity
of AAV2-neurturin gene therapy (CERE-120): differences between Parkinson’s disease
and nonhuman primate brains. Mov Disord 26: 27–36.
45. Kordower, JH, Herzog, CD, Dass, B, Bakay, RA, Stansell, J 3rd, Gasmi, M et al. (2006).
Delivery of neurturin by AAV2 (CERE-120)-mediated gene transfer provides structural
and functional neuroprotection and neurorestoration in MPTP-treated monkeys.
Ann Neurol 60: 706–715.
46. Herzog, CD, Dass, B, Holden, JE, Stansell, J 3rd, Gasmi, M, Tuszynski, MH et al. (2007).
Striatal delivery of CERE-120, an AAV2 vector encoding human neurturin, enhances
activity of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal system in aged monkeys. Mov Disord 22:
1124–1132.
47. Decressac, M, Ulusoy, A, Mattsson, B, Georgievska, B, Romero-Ramos, M, Kirik, D
et al. (2011). GDNF fails to exert neuroprotection in a rat a-synuclein model of
Parkinson’s disease. Brain 134(Pt 8): 2302–2311.
48. Decressac, M, Kadkhodaei, B, Mattsson, B, Laguna, A, Perlmann, T and Björklund, A
(2012). a-Synuclein-induced down-regulation of Nurr1 disrupts GDNF signaling in
nigral dopamine neurons. Sci Transl Med 4: 163ra156.
49. Lo Bianco, C, Déglon, N, Pralong, W and Aebischer, P (2004). Lentiviral nigral delivery
of GDNF does not prevent neurodegeneration in a genetic rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. Neurobiol Dis 17: 283–289.
50. Akerud, P, Alberch, J, Eketjäll, S, Wagner, J and Arenas, E (1999). Differential effects
of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor and neurturin on developing and adult
substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons. J Neurochem 73: 70–78.
51. Rosenblad, C, Kirik, D, Devaux, B, Moffat, B, Phillips, HS and Björklund, A (1999).
Protection and regeneration of nigral dopaminergic neurons by neurturin or GDNF in
a partial lesion model of Parkinson’s disease after administration into the striatum or
the lateral ventricle. Eur J Neurosci 11: 1554–1566.
52. Gasmi, M, Brandon, EP, Herzog, CD, Wilson, A, Bishop, KM, Hofer, EK et al. (2007).
AAV2-mediated delivery of human neurturin to the rat nigrostriatal system: longterm efficacy and tolerability of CERE-120 for Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Dis 27:
67–76.
53. Ceregene, I (2013). Ceregene reports data from Parkinson’s disease phase 2b study.
http://www.ceregene.com/press_041913.asp.
54. Eriksdotter Jönhagen, M, Nordberg, A, Amberla, K, Bäckman, L, Ebendal, T,
Meyerson, B et al. (1998). Intracerebroventricular infusion of nerve growth factor in
three patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord 9: 246–257.
55. Nauta, HJ, Wehman, JC, Koliatsos, VE, Terrell, MA and Chung, K (1999).
Intraventricular infusion of nerve growth factor as the cause of sympathetic fiber
sprouting in sensory ganglia. J Neurosurg 91: 447–453.
56. Nutt, JG, Burchiel, KJ, Comella, CL, Jankovic, J, Lang, AE, Laws, ER Jr et al.; ICV GDNF
Study Group. Implanted intracerebroventricular. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor. (2003). Randomized, double-blind trial of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) in PD. Neurology 60: 69–73.
57. Olanow, CW, Goetz, CG, Kordower, JH, Stoessl, AJ, Sossi, V, Brin, MF et al. (2003).
A double-blind controlled trial of bilateral fetal nigral transplantation in Parkinson’s
disease. Ann Neurol 54: 403–414.
58. Lang, AE, Gill, S, Patel, NK, Lozano, A, Nutt, JG, Penn, R et al. (2006). Randomized
controlled trial of intraputamenal glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor infusion in
Parkinson disease. Ann Neurol 59: 459–466.
59. Hovland, DN Jr, Boyd, RB, Butt, MT, Engelhardt, JA, Moxness, MS, Ma, MH et al.
(2007). Six-month continuous intraputamenal infusion toxicity study of recombinant
methionyl human glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (r-metHuGDNF in rhesus
monkeys. Toxicol Pathol 35: 1013–1029.
60. Herzog, CD, Dass, B, Gasmi, M, Bakay, R, Stansell, JE, Tuszynski, M et al. (2008).
Transgene expression, bioactivity, and safety of CERE-120 (AAV2-neurturin) following
delivery to the monkey striatum. Mol Ther 16: 1737–1744.
61. Herzog, CD, Brown, L, Gammon, D, Kruegel, B, Lin, R, Wilson, A et al. (2009).
Expression, bioactivity, and safety 1 year after adeno-associated viral vector type
2-mediated delivery of neurturin to the monkey nigrostriatal system support cere-120
for Parkinson’s disease. Neurosurgery 64: 602–12; discussion 612.
62. Herzog, CD, Bishop, K, Brown, L, Wilson, A, Kordower, JH and Bartus, RT (2011).
Gene transfer provides a practical means for safe, long-term, targeted delivery of
biologically-active neurotrophic factor proteins for neurodegenerative diseases.
Drug Deliv and Transl Res 1: 361–382.
63. Grieger, JC and Samulski, RJ (2012). Adeno-associated virus vectorology,
manufacturing, and clinical applications. Meth Enzymol 507: 229–254.
64. Xiao, X, Li, J and Samulski, RJ (1998). Production of high-titer recombinant adenoassociated virus vectors in the absence of helper adenovirus. J Virol 72: 2224–2232.
65. Aslanidi, G, Lamb, K and Zolotukhin, S (2009). An inducible system for highly efficient
production of recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors in insect Sf9 cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 5059–5064.

Molecular Therapy vol. 22 no. 3 mar. 2014

Parkinson’s Disease Gene Therapy

66. Clément, N, Knop, DR and Byrne, BJ (2009). Large-scale adeno-associated viral vector
production using a herpesvirus-based system enables manufacturing for clinical
studies. Hum Gene Ther 20: 796–806.
67. Lang, AE and Obeso, JA (2004). Challenges in Parkinson’s disease: restoration of the
nigrostriatal dopamine system is not enough. Lancet Neurol 3: 309–316.
68. Zhu, S, Stavrovskaya, IG, Drozda, M, Kim, BY, Ona, V, Li, M et al. (2002). Minocycline
inhibits cytochrome c release and delays progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
in mice. Nature 417: 74–78.
69. Gordon, PH, Moore, DH, Miller, RG, Florence, JM, Verheijde, JL, Doorish, C et al.;
Western ALS Study Group. (2007). Efficacy of minocycline in patients with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis: a phase III randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 6: 1045–1053.
70. O’Reilly, M, Kohn, DB, Bartlett, J, Benson, J, Brooks, PJ, Byrne, BJ et al. (2013). Gene
therapy for rare diseases: summary of a national institutes of health workshop,
september 13, 2012. Hum Gene Ther 24: 355–362.
71. Kordower, JH, Olanow, CW, Dodiya, HB, Chu, Y, Beach, TG, Adler, CH et al. (2013).
Disease duration and the integrity of the nigrostriatal system in Parkinson’s disease.
Brain 136(Pt 8): 2419–2431.
72. Kang, JH, Irwin, DJ, Chen-Plotkin, AS, Siderowf, A, Caspell, C, Coffey, CS et al.
(2013). Association of cerebrospinal fluid beta-amyloid 1-42, T-tau, P-tau181, and
alpha-Synuclein levels with clinical features of drug-naive patients with early Parkinson
disease. JAMA Neurol. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3861.
73. Chung, CY, Koprich, JB, Siddiqi, H and Isacson, O (2009). Dynamic changes in
presynaptic and axonal transport proteins combined with striatal neuroinflammation
precede dopaminergic neuronal loss in a rat model of AAV alpha-synucleinopathy.
J Neurosci 29: 3365–3373.
74. Kirik, D, Rosenblad, C, Burger, C, Lundberg, C, Johansen, TE, Muzyczka, N et al.
(2002). Parkinson-like neurodegeneration induced by targeted overexpression of
alpha-synuclein in the nigrostriatal system. J Neurosci 22: 2780–2791.
75. Lo Bianco, C, Ridet, JL, Schneider, BL, Deglon, N and Aebischer, P (2002). alpha
-Synucleinopathy and selective dopaminergic neuron loss in a rat lentiviral-based
model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99: 10813–10818.
76. Scott, DA, Tabarean, I, Tang, Y, Cartier, A, Masliah, E and Roy, S (2010).
A pathologic cascade leading to synaptic dysfunction in alpha-synuclein-induced
neurodegeneration. J Neurosci 30: 8083–8095.
77. Centocor Inc, H (1996). Centocor Inc History. vol. 14. St. James Press: International
Directory of Company Histories.
78. McCloskey, RV, Straube, RC, Sanders, C, Smith, SM and Smith, CR (1994).
Treatment of septic shock with human monoclonal antibody HA-1A. A randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. CHESS Trial Study Group. Ann Intern Med
121: 1–5.
79. Marks, L (2012). The birth pangs of monoclonal antibody therapeutics: the failure and
legacy of Centoxin. MAbs 4: 403–412.
80. An, Z (2009). Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibodies: From bench to clinic: Hoboken,
New Jersey.
81. Jones, D (2011). The long march of antisense. Nat Rev Drug Discov 10: 401–402.
82. Mount, JD, Herzog, RW, Tillson, DM, Goodman, SA, Robinson, N, McCleland, ML et
al. (2002). Sustained phenotypic correction of hemophilia B dogs with a factor IX null
mutation by liver-directed gene therapy. Blood 99: 2670–2676.
83. Wang, L, Nichols, TC, Read, MS, Bellinger, DA and Verma, IM (2000). Sustained
expression of therapeutic level of factor IX in hemophilia B dogs by AAV-mediated
gene therapy in liver. Mol Ther 1: 154–158.
84. Manno, CS, Chew, AJ, Hutchison, S, Larson, PJ, Herzog, RW, Arruda, VR et al. (2003).
AAV-mediated factor IX gene transfer to skeletal muscle in patients with severe
hemophilia B. Blood 101: 2963–2972.
85. Manno, CS, Pierce, GF, Arruda, VR, Glader, B, Ragni, M, Rasko, JJ et al. (2006).
Successful transduction of liver in hemophilia by AAV-Factor IX and limitations
imposed by the host immune response. Nat Med 12: 342–347.
86. McCarty, DM, Fu, H, Monahan, PE, Toulson, CE, Naik, P and Samulski, RJ (2003). Adenoassociated virus terminal repeat (TR) mutant generates self-complementary vectors to
overcome the rate-limiting step to transduction in vivo. Gene Ther 10: 2112–2118.
87. Wu, Z, Sun, J, Zhang, T, Yin, C, Yin, F, Van Dyke, T et al. (2008). Optimization of
self-complementary AAV vectors for liver-directed expression results in sustained
correction of hemophilia B at low vector dose. Mol Ther 16: 280–289.
88. Nathwani, AC, Tuddenham, EG, Rangarajan, S, Rosales, C, McIntosh, J, Linch, DC et
al. (2011). Adenovirus-associated virus vector-mediated gene transfer in hemophilia B.
N Engl J Med 365: 2357–2365.
89. Monahan, PE, Walsh, C, Powell, J, Gomperts, E, Samulski, RJ, Mcphee, S (2013).
A phase 1/2 open-label trial of an adeno-associated virus (AAV) serotype 8 factor IX
gene therapy (AskBio009) in adults with hemophilia B. Haemophilia 19: 468–469.
90. Lonser, RR (2009). A phase 1 open-label dose escalation safety study of convectionenhanced delivery (CED) of adeno-associated virus encoding glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (AAV2-GDNF) in subjects with advanced Parkinson's disease.
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee Protocol 0901–962.
91. Palfi, S, Gurruchaga, JM, Ralph, GS, Lepetit, H, Lavisse, S, Buttery, PC et al. (2014).
Long-term safety and tolerability of ProSavin, a lentiviral vector-based gene therapy of
Parkinson's disease: a dose escalation, open-label, phase 1/2 trial. The Lancet,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61939-X.

This work is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-Share
Alike 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of this license,
visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

497

