Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Neurobiology of Disease
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynbdi

Review

Translating the therapeutic potential of neurotrophic factors to clinical ‘proof of
concept’: A personal saga achieving a career-long quest
Raymond T. Bartus ⁎
Ceregene, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 15 December 2011
Revised 29 February 2012
Accepted 6 April 2012
Available online 16 April 2012
Keywords:
Translational research
Neurotrophic factor
Gene transfer
Gene therapy
Parkinson's disease
Neurturin
AAV
CERE-120
Therapeutic development
Proof of concept

a b s t r a c t
While the therapeutic potential of neurotrophic factors has been well-recognized for over two decades,
attempts to translate that potential to the clinic have been disappointing, largely due to signiﬁcant delivery obstacles. Similarly, gene therapy (or gene transfer) emerged as a potentially powerful, new therapeutic approach
nearly two decades ago and despite its promise, also suffered serious setbacks when applied to the human clinic.
As advances continue to be made in both ﬁelds, ironically, they may now be poised to complement each other to
produce a translational breakthrough. The accumulated data argue that gene transfer provides the ‘enabling
technology’ that can solve the age-old delivery problems that have plagued the translation of neurotrophic
factors as treatments for chronic central nervous system diseases.
A leading translational program applying gene transfer to deliver a neurotrophic factor to rejuvenate and protect degenerating human neurons is CERE-120 (AAV2-NRTN). To date, over two dozen nonclinical studies and
three clinical trials have been completed. A fourth (pivotal) clinical trial has completed all dosing and is currently evaluating safety and efﬁcacy. In total, eighty Parkinson's disease (PD) subjects have thus far been dosed with
CERE-120 (some 7 years ago), representing over 250 cumulative patient-years of exposure, with no serious
safety issues identiﬁed. In a completed sham-surgery, double-blinded controlled trial, though the primary endpoint (the Uniﬁed Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UDPRS) motor off score measured at 12 months) did not
show beneﬁt from CERE-120, several important motor and quality of life measurements did, including the
same UPDRS-motor-off score, pre-speciﬁed to also be measured at a longer, 18-month post-dosing time
point. Importantly, not a single measurement favored the sham control group. This study therefore, provided
important, well-controlled evidence establishing ‘clinical proof of concept’ for gene transfer to the CNS and
the ﬁrst controlled evidence for clinical beneﬁt of a neurotrophic factor in a human neurodegenerative disease.
This paper reviews the development of CERE-120, starting historically with the long-standing interest in the
therapeutic potential of neurotrophic factors and continuing with selective accounts of past efforts to translate
their potential to the clinic, eventually leading to the application of gene transfer and its role as the ‘enabling
technology’. Because of growing interest in translational R&D, including its practice in industry, the paper is
uniquely oriented from the author's personal, quasi-autobiographic perspective and career-long experiences
conducting translational research and development, with a focus on various translational neurotrophic factor
programs spanning 30+ years in Big Pharma and development-stage biotech companies. It is hoped that by
sharing these perspectives, practical insight and information might be provided to others also interested in
translational R&D as well as neurotrophic factors and gene therapy, offering readers the opportunity to beneﬁt
from some of our successes, while possibly avoiding some of our missteps.
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Big Pharma: a training ground for translational R&D and personal introduction to neurotrophic factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Neurotrophic factors: can the degenerating brain be induced to heal itself?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Specialized Biopharma: the opportunity to formally attempt to translate neurotrophic factors as treatments for neurodegenerative diseases .

⁎ Ceregene, Inc., 9381 Judicial Drive, Suite 130, San Diego CA 92121, USA.
E-mail address: rtbartus@ceregene.com.
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com).
0969-9961/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2012.04.004

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

154
155
156
156

154

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Transporting NGF across the BBB for treating Alzheimer's disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Opening the BBB (blood brain barrier) by relaxing the tight junctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sustained release of protein as alternative delivery method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pilot program involving AAV2-GDNF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
‘Delivery to the brain: the problem lurking behind the problem’ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The new millennium in Biotech: personally going “all in” to translate neurotrophic factors, using gene transfer as the means to overcome the
long-standing delivery issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The focus on Parkinson's disease and potential value of neurturin (NRTN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gene transfer as an ‘enabling technology’. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The design and construction of CERE-120 (AAV-NRTN) as a novel gene therapy product for PD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The initial CERE-120 non-clinical program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Key translational issues confronted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Translational advantages of CERE-120 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kinetics and expression patterns of NRTN following CERE-120 injections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bioactivity and efﬁcacy of NRTN following CERE-120 administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Safety of CERE-120 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Synopsis: preclinical proof of concept support for CERE-120 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Identifying appropriate CERE-120 doses for testing in humans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Initial clinical experience with CERE-120: establishing clinical proof of concept for neurotrophic factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Initial Phase 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Controlled Phase 2a trial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Performing due diligence on the concept of targeting the substantia nigra with CERE-120 to enhance the bioactivity on NRTN in PD subjects .
Additional nonclinical studies prior to new dosing approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dose-target optimized Phase 1/2b protocol: maximizing the effects of CERE-120 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Synopsis of program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Disclosure statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Introduction
Neurological diseases continue to constitute a huge unmet medical need, contributing to an ever-increasing ﬁnancial burden on our
health care system as well as personal burden on families and society.
Neurotrophic factors arguably provide the greatest, current opportunity to signiﬁcantly improve the treatment of a range of neurological
diseases. The more obvious opportunities involve chronic neurodegenerative diseases, like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's and
ALS where improvement in symptoms, restoration of function of
degenerating neurons and slowing or even reversing disease progression seems feasible. Additionally, less-obvious opportunities for neurotrophic factors include a host of other poorly treated disorders for
which loss of neurons and neuronal function have also been linked
to their key symptoms (Apkarian et al., 2004; Jeste and Lohr, 1989;
LaVail et al., 1998; Sheline et al., 1999), including chronic pain, psychiatric diseases (e.g., schizophrenia and depression) and blindness.
In contrast to other potential therapeutic approaches, studies with
neurotrophic factors in animal models have consistently supported
the idea that they have the capacity to restore the function of dying
neurons, improve compromised morphology and phenotype, and
protect neurons from further degeneration in human neurodegenerative diseases. My personal interest in the potential of neurotrophic
factors as therapeutics for human neurodegenerative disease spans
25 years, long ago captured in an editorial written for Neurobiology
of Aging entitled: ‘Neurotrophic Factors: Can the Degenerating Brain
Be Induced to Heal Itself?’ (Bartus, 1989a). The editorial described
the therapeutic promise seen in neurotrophic factors and was
intended to help stimulate broader interest in their potential use for
treating neurodegenerative diseases (Box 1). It seems revealing that
more than two decades later, despite the early excitement surrounding their promise, no controlled study has yet produced sufﬁciently
robust clinical beneﬁt to support regulatory (e.g., FDA) approval.
However, clear progress has been made in both basic and translational research, including insight gained from a completed multicenter, sham-surgery controlled study testing CERE-120, or AAV2-

.
.
.
.
.

158
159
160
160
160

.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

161
161
162
162
163
163
163
164
169
169
169
170
170
171
172
172
172
174
174
175
175
176
176
177

NRTN (neurturin) in moderately advanced Parkinson's disease (PD)
subjects. While the results of this trial did not meet the goal of generating data sufﬁcient to support FDA approval, they did nonetheless produce multiple lines of evidence demonstrating that NRTN was able to
produce some of the desired clinical beneﬁt in Parkinson's patients.
Though beneﬁt was not seen on the primary endpoint (improvement
on UPDRS-motor-off score, measured at 12 months, post-dosing, compared to sham-surgery), many other pre-speciﬁed and clinically important motor and quality of life measurements did show improvement

Box 1
Early comments regarding the translational potential of neurotrophic
factors, as well as the delivery challenges posed when translating
them as treatments for human neurodegenerative diseases.
• Editorial written, 1988. Neurotrophic Factors: Can the degenerating brain be induced to heal itself? ‘When one considers
the history of neurology, the idea that one might be able to
treat patients so that their brain cells might either withstand
deadly perturbations or regenerate to a healthier, more functional state is truly revolutionary. Never before in the history
of medical science could we imagine that means to induce
damaged parts of the brain to heal.’
Excerpted from Bartus, 1989a Neurobiology of Aging, Volume
10, Page 513.
• Editorial written, 1988. Delivery to the Brain: The problem lurking behind the problem. ‘The challenge of delivering new therapeutics for neurodegenerative diseases seems particularly
important when one considers that the more novel therapeutic
approaches to treat the pathogenic or pathologic variables involve peptides and proteins.’
Excerpted from Bartus, 1989b Neurobiology of Aging, Volume
10, Page 621.

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

with CERE-120 at 12 months, with even more measurements showing
beneﬁt at 18 months (including the UPDRS-motor-off score at this
later, blinded time-point). Equally important, not a single measurement
at any time point similarly favored the sham control group. Moreover,
the data continued to support the general safety of the approach.
Thus, while the program has not yet generated data sufﬁcient to gain
regulatory approval, it has provided important ‘clinical proof of concept’
evidence in a well-controlled trial, demonstrating that a neurotrophic
factor can signiﬁcantly improve the symptoms of a neurodegenerative
disease, enabled by the use of gene transfer as a safe and effective delivery
method (Marks et al., 2010).
The development of CERE-120 has therefore grown into one of the
leading novel therapeutic programs for PD, with three separate clinical
trials completed and another multi-center, controlled trial now fully enrolled, with clinical assessments continuing to evaluate safety and possible efﬁcacy over time. The program is supported by over two dozen
nonclinical studies and over a dozen peer-reviewed publications. To
date, approximately 80 PD subjects have been dosed, some as long
ago as 7 years, with no serious, unexpected safety issues noted. The
time and effort required to advance the program to its current state
have been signiﬁcant, while the translational lessons learned and insight gained were substantial.
At the time we began working on AAV-NRTN (CERE-120), it is likely
that few would have predicted this program would advance to its current position among translational neurotrophic factor and CNS gene
therapy programs. Several formidable programs had already achieved
a signiﬁcant head-start well before Ceregene even began their ﬁrst animal experiments with AAV-NRTN (CERE-120). Amgen (one of the most
successful biotech companies, ever) had already launched a directlycompeting clinical program in PD using a closely-related and far
better-characterized neurotrophic factor, GDNF (glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor). Similarly, Cephalon (a very successful publicallytraded, biopharmaceutical company) had already advanced a small
molecule, neurotrophic factor mimetic into PD clinical trials with
much promise (Saporito et al., 2002; Wang and Johnson, 2008). Around
the time Ceregene was merely opening its doors, another company
(Avigen), armed with a war-chest of funds generated from the public
sale of their stock, had already completed their nonclinical program
and ﬁled an IND to test a gene therapy product for PD. Finally, while
we were still in the midst of executing our nonclinical program, yet another company (Neurologix) was launching a clinical trial for yet another gene transfer product for PD. Thus, all of these competing programs
were literally years ahead of ours. Yet, each of these programs has
since been discontinued by those companies (and some of the companies have since disappeared), while Ceregene's program has continued
to advance. What translational lessons might be learned and shared?
Translational R&D is a complicated endeavor, providing as many opportunities for avoiding pitfalls as it does hurdles and unexpected obstacles. Over the past 10–15 years, interest in identifying and developing
new therapeutics has grown in academia and government, mirroring
a focus traditionally held by industry. In an effort to address some of
the knowledge gaps inherent in this growing trend, this manuscript
uses the example of the many translational issues and activities that
preceded and eventually contributed to the development of CERE-120.
To help provide more unique insight into translational R&D, the manuscript offers a more personal account of the author's translational experiences in industry, including the gradual migration to the use of gene
transfer as the enabling technology to overcome the signiﬁcant translational obstacles presented by neurotrophic factors. As such, this is not
intended to be a general review of all the advances made in the neurotrophic factor or gene transfer ﬁelds during the past 25 years, nor an attempt to acknowledge all of the breakthroughs or major contributions
to those ﬁelds. Rather, this manuscript is intended as a personal account
of a career in translational research and the perspectives gained, as they
gradually evolved to the opportunity to lead the effort to apply gene
transfer to translate neurotrophic factors and establish clinical proof of

155

concept. My hope is that by sharing this saga, some of the events
and challenges I experienced may prove as informative to others as
they have been valuable to me, and perhaps in some way, maybe
even as interesting. Moreover, it might provide an opportunity for
others interested in developing new products to beneﬁt from our
successes as well as avoid the inefﬁciencies inherent in repeating
some of our missteps.
Big Pharma: a training ground for translational R&D and personal
introduction to neurotrophic factors
Because my early interest in science was focused on a desire to
seek new treatments for serious CNS disorders, it was natural for
me to adopt the unconventional career path of accepting a position
in industry, rather than a more traditional academic appointment.
After all, industry is where the vast majority of new, innovative products
have been, and continue to be developed (though the genesis of many
basic ideas behind those products very often originate in academia or
the National Institutes of Health (NIH)).
The world involving new drug discovery and development has
changed dramatically in the 30+ years since I became involved
with translational R&D. Small molecules, and in particular oral pills,
were by far the most widely used type of product. Pharmaceutical science had barely begun to employ then-novel receptor binding and kinetic approaches to help target the discovery and development of
novel therapeutics or deﬁne mechanisms of action of existing medications. Biologics had not yet emerged as a therapeutic entity and
neurotrophic factors as treatments for neurodegenerative diseases
had not yet been considered. Gene therapy was still a decade or
more away from reality, and even biotechnology had not grown to
become a bona ﬁde therapeutic approach. Even relatively simple
monoclonal antibodies, which now represent an ever-expanding,
multibillion dollar biopharmaceutical business, were still more than
a decade away from demonstrating proof of concept for any human
disease. Thus, while the initial programs I was involved with had little
or nothing to do with neurotrophic factors or gene therapy, in reality,
all translational R&D involves many common features and challenges.
Moreover, they share a singular common goal of conducting tests to
determine whether a potential product possesses sufﬁcient safety
and efﬁcacy to ultimately be used to treat a human disease. Thus, as
described below, the experiences gained during this time ultimately
played an important role in the later development of AAV-NRTN for
PD.
More speciﬁcally, my initial responsibility primarily involved the
challenge of helping to establish and eventually lead the ﬁrst-ever
programs intended to treat the major cognitive deﬁcits of AD and related age-related maladies. Additionally, I also served as a role player
for many other programs intended to treat other CNS problems, providing either empirical or conceptual support (see Table 1). My early
research on treatment approaches for the memory loss in AD eventually produced a body of work that helped establish the link between
the loss of function of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons and the
major cognitive symptoms of AD and related disorders; i.e., the socalled ‘Cholinergic Hypothesis’ (see reviews by Bartus et al., 1982;
Bartus and Dean, 2009). Given its ‘neurological’ nature, it also provided me an early introduction to neurotrophic factors and some of its
early pioneers. The “Cholinergic Hypothesis” had gradually gained
recognition as a useful heuristic tool as well as translational concept,
in that it provided the conceptual framework and empirical foundation that eventually translated to the ﬁrst four drugs ever approved
by the FDA for AD (see Bartus, 2000). It was because of a growing interest in the cholinergic hypothesis that I was exposed to early evidence supporting the radical idea that endogenous proteins, called
neurotrophic factors, might possibly reverse and stop the degeneration of neurons in something as complicated and destructive as AD.
Nerve growth factor (NGF) had been the ﬁrst neurotrophic factor

156

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Table 1
Major translational R&D programs in Big Pharma (1973–1988: Parke-Davis & Lederle Labs, both since acquired by Pﬁzer).
Product

Mechanism

Indication(s)

Status/stage of development

Pramiracetam

Novel nootropic

Alzheimer's disease (AD); mild
cognitive impairment (MCI)

Approved and marketed in select EU countries: 1990s

AChE inhibitors

Cholinergic function enhancers

AD; MCI

Concept and independent translational research contributed to
1st four products approved for AD: mid 1990s to early 2000s

Sonata (zaleplon)

1st non-benzodiazepine sedative/hypnotic

Insomnia

Approved and marketed: 1999

CI-275838

Novel-class nootropic

AD

Phase 1 — suspended due to side effects: 2000

Bicifadine

Novel serotonin–norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor (SNRI)

Depression; chronic pain

Phase 3 — program terminated by licensee: 2009

Indiplon

Novel, non-benzodiazepine sedative/hypnotic

Insomnia

Phase 3 — “approvable letter”; development suspended by licensee: 2009

Ocinaplon

1st GABA-complex agonist anxiolytic void of
sedative side effects

Anxiety

Phase 2 — liver tox; development suspended by licensee: 2009

discovered and was eventually shown to provide crucial neurotrophic
support for the same basal forebrain cholinergic neurons that were
degenerating in AD and that formed the focus for research related
to the cholinergic hypothesis. While participating on panels and in
symposia by virtue of my role in helping to formulate and empirically
establish the cholinergic hypothesis (e.g., a 1982 Science paper was
soon-after designated a “Citation Classic” by ISI, ranking #4 among
neuroscience/neurology papers from the early 1980s to mid-1990s),
I came to know Franz Hefti and Fred (Rusty) Gage. They were both independently engaged in pioneering research demonstrating that
under conditions of neurodegeneration, increasing NGF levels could
restore function and protect these same cholinergic neurons from further degeneration and death. It was soon clear to me and others that
the intriguing and powerful characteristics of neurotrophic factors
reported by Gage, Hefti and others might possibly provide the potential
to literally revolutionize the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases.
While I soon found myself dabbling in the neurotrophic ﬁeld via
collaborations with colleagues in academia (e.g., Azmitia et al.,
1988; Kordower et al., 1988), a question that I began to ask was
how I might engage in a more formal translational research program
intended to develop neurotrophic factors for therapeutic purposes.
This hardly was the type of program to be easily embraced at Big
Pharma, for in many different ways the concept was simply too far
ahead of industry, which still primarily focused on small molecules,
mostly orally administered. However, before that question is
addressed, it might be useful to provide a more detailed overview of
the potential therapeutic advantages of neurotrophic factors, as
viewed 25 years ago and continues to be viewed today.
Neurotrophic factors: can the degenerating brain be induced to
heal itself?
The editorial I wrote nearly 25 years ago that has the same title as
this section (Box 1) reﬂected the enthusiasm I felt for neurotrophic factors, though it was clearly too early for anyone to know whether they
might actually live up to this early promise. However, it would have
been even more difﬁcult for anyone to have known that after over
two decades of intense animal research and many attempts to show efﬁcacy in human clinical trials, their therapeutic utility would remain
unproven. Perhaps even more surprising, despite that extended timeframe and continued uncertainty, enthusiasm for their therapeutic potential has nonetheless remained relatively high.
This raises the obvious question: what was it about neurotrophic
factors that stimulated such interest, and why after 25 years of research and development, with no approved product to show, has
the promise of this class of molecules persisted? The unique features

of neurotrophic factors and the therapeutic possibilities they provoke,
when combined with the wealth of mutually-corroborating scientiﬁc evidence about them, make neurotrophic factors a compelling
target for translational R&D (Box 2). They offer the opportunity
for paradigm-shifting, transformational new therapies for serious,
unmet medical problems. Yet, they enjoy a deep empirical foundation
about their biology, posing only a fraction of the risk normally associated with such new opportunities. Even more enticing, many agree
that inherent in the complex but powerful biology of neurotrophic
factors lies the likelihood that if one can demonstrate a signiﬁcant reduction in clinical symptoms, then that neurotrophic factor should
likely also provide additional beneﬁt by helping to delay, reverse or
possibly even halt disease progression. That is, the same repair
genes activated by the neurotrophic factor that restores the function
of degenerating neurons to provide symptomatic improvement
should also produce healthier neurons that are more able to withstand the pathogenic pressures that drive disease progression. As
many have noted in the past, this possibility of reversing and slowing
disease progression represents the ‘holy grail’ for neurological diseases and neurotrophic factors currently seem to provide the best opportunity for accomplishing this.

Specialized Biopharma: the opportunity to formally attempt to
translate neurotrophic factors as treatments for
neurodegenerative diseases
The 15 years spent at Big Pharma working with teams of scientists
that focused on the successful discovery and early development of several novel therapies (Table 1) provided invaluable, practical R&D experience that also served to highlight the signiﬁcant obstacles that would
be faced by any program intending to translate neurotrophic factors to
products. It convinced me that if neurotrophic factors were to be successfully developed as therapeutics, it would require a longer-term
commitment and higher tolerance for risk than most Big Pharmas at
the time likely possessed. There simply were too many obstacles and
unknown risks that needed to be confronted to compete for resources
with other programs and concepts. Indeed, when one considers that
no such product has yet achieved FDA approval, now 25 years later,
that perspective would have proven to be correct! Cephalon would
later make signiﬁcant progress developing a small-molecule that mimicked the effects of a neurotrophic factor as a treatment for PD and the
program advanced nicely through in vitro and nonclinical testing and
into clinical trials with much promise and excitement. However, the
disappointing results obtained in a controlled clinical trial in PD and
the subsequent termination of the program amply underlie the

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

157

Box 2
Neurotrophic factors, their therapeutic promise and translational appeal.
Neurotrophic factors are endogenous proteins that, during ontogeny and early maturation, are responsible for neuronal differentiation,
survival and establishing appropriate efferent connectivity of the nervous system (Huang and Reichardt, 2001; Snider and Johnson,
1989; Sofroniew et al., 2001). Each of the many different neurotrophic factors thus far identified serves these roles for only a relatively
small number of specific neuronal types or populations. Once the nervous system has developed, the levels of these proteins decline and
they assume a more maintenance-like function during adulthood and throughout the aging process (Hefti et al., 1989; Huang and Reichardt, 2001; Snider and Johnson, 1989; Sofroniew et al., 2001). However, research over the past several decades from around the globe
has consistently demonstrated that under conditions of neurodegeneration, supra-physiological (i.e., biopharmaceutical) levels of a neurotrophic factor can induce neuronal repair genes in degenerating neurons. Induction of these repair genes routinely produces morphological and functional restoration of the neurons, significant slowing further neurodegeneration and even protecting against death (Hefti et
al., 1989). Thus, neurotrophic factors provide the opportunity to substantially rejuvenate degenerating neurons in humans – morphometrically
and functionally – potentially improving symptoms, extending the utility of current pharmacotherapies and possibly slowing, halting or even reversing disease progression.
Neurotrophic factors appear to provide functional and morphological benefits to their responsive neurons, no matter how the neurons
are damaged or impaired — an extremely important point for translational purposes. They have consistently provided benefit following a
wide variety of neuronal perturbations, including cutting and/or crushing axons; exposure to neurotoxins, free radical donors, inflammatory agents and other cytotoxic agents; genetic mutations; protein processing defects and the effects of age, alone and in combination
with other perturbations. Neurotrophic factors therefore seem to represent a ‘final common therapeutic pathway’ to neuronal restoration
and protection, likely providing potential benefit independent of many possible pathogenic cascade(s) that are truly responsible for the disease in humans and free from the traditional burdens of theoretical insight and assumptions surrounding those issues. In other words, the
potential therapeutic benefits of neurotrophic factors seem to be ‘pathogenic neutral’, which offers a major translational advantage, given
the complexity inherent in most chronic neurodegenerative diseases and the uncertainty and controversy regarding which pathogenic variables might be most important. If one is able to identify a neuronal population whose degeneration and/or loss of function has been linked
to the symptoms or pathogenesis of a disease, then the appropriate neurotrophic factor can likely provide restorative effects without any
need for a clear understanding of the pathogenic variables involved. This rather unique characteristic of neurotrophic factors provides a
significant, perhaps unprecedented opportunity to reduce risks in developing a ‘first-in-class’ therapeutic for a serious, unmet need. Moreover, it leverages decades of cross-disciplinary research from around the globe that collectively establishes nonclinical proof of mechanism and
proof of concept for the potential benefit of neurotrophic factors when degeneration of a specific neuronal population is known to represent a
key feature in the manifestation of a human disease.

difﬁculties inherent in translating novel, paradigm-shifting concepts
into clinical reality (Saporito et al., 2002; Wang and Johnson, 2008).
In the mid to late 1980s, the venture capital world and Wall Street
became increasingly interested in novel, higher-risk treatments for
CNS diseases leading to the formation of several new start-up companies, some of which speciﬁcally deﬁned neurotrophic factors as a
therapeutic focus area. I was recruited in mid-1988 as VP, R&D and
Chief Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer at Cortex, being the ﬁrst full time employee
to sign-on. Cortex was founded on the basis of the scientiﬁc strengths
and reputations of three University of California, Irvine professors.
The underlying assumption was that they, and inventions from their
laboratories, would provide the ideas to fuel the R&D of the company,
leading to new, innovative products for neurodegenerative disorders,
with neurotrophic factors being the main approach.
Without question, each of the UCI professors had been engaged in
seminal research, including neurotrophic factors; however, with a single exception, none of their research had generated any patentable
neurotrophic-related inventions — a fact that did not become clear to
us until we began to develop R&D strategies for Cortex (lesson
learned!). The single exception involved an intriguing observation
that systemically-administered n-hexacosanol, a long-chain fatty alcohol, could produce robust neurotrophic-like activity, protecting cholinergic neurons in the medial septum from degeneration and death
following transection of their projection to the hippocampus (Borg et
al., 1990). The translational implications of achieving robust neurotrophic activity following parenteral administration of a potential therapeutic were obvious; better still, the phenomenon had not yet been
reported (and presumably observed) by others and therefore the
concept was patentable (and a license could be obtained from the
University of California). Indeed, if replicated and developed into a
product, the data would have circumvented the serious delivery issues

that have continued to plague the translation of neurotrophic factors
for over 20 years. The major problem with the idea was that we at
Cortex were not able to replicate the intriguing results. Recognizing
the importance of gaining as much certainty as possible, I arranged a
collaboration between a co-author from the original study who was
still working at UCI and an independent investigator (Jeffrey Kordower,
University of Illinois Medical Center). Unfortunately, even with the participation of one of the original investigators, we still could not replicate
the original hexacosanol observations and apparently no one has done
so since. The good news is that we saved signiﬁcant time and
otherwise-wasted resources by ﬁrst conducting the appropriate tests
to assure that the initial results were as robust and promising as they
seemed — a somewhat obvious exercise that is too often skipped
when new companies ﬁnd themselves under intense pressure to develop products quickly and thus too often allow themselves to compromise
rigorous scientiﬁc practice and judgment.
Though we attempted to quickly establish a discovery program to
search for and identify more novel neurotrophic factors, de novo at
Cortex, that effort was not successful and was eventually abandoned
in favor of other (non-neurotrophic factor) programs we had been
able to develop that showed promise, including adenosine agonists
(Jacobson et al., 1992; Maillard et al., 1994) and calpain inhibitors
(Li et al., 1993) (Table 2). Another noteworthy effort initiated just
prior to my leaving Cortex was their current AMPAkines program
which remains their major focus today. All three of these programs
were the brain-child of Gary Lynch (one of the 3 UCI professors associated with Cortex).
The calpain inhibitor program became the most advanced program while I was at Cortex (see, Bartus, 1997, for review) and ironically soon indirectly contributed to a new opportunity to return to
efforts to develop neurotrophic factors as useful therapeutics. During

158

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Table 2
Major translational R&D programs in Specialized Neuropharma (1988–1992: Cortex).
Product

Mechanism

Indication(s)

Status/stage of development

Multiple neurotrophic
factors
Hexacosanol
Adenosine agonists

Varied

Neurodegeneration

Program terminated 1990; poor IP and/or biological activity

Purported neurotrophic mimick
Neuronal modulator

Neurodegeration
Stroke; closed head injury

Calpain inhibitors

Relatively potent and selective inhibitors of the
neutral, calcium-dependent protease, calpain

Acute and chronic neurodegenerative
diseases

Program terminated 1989, lack of efﬁcacy
Program terminated 1991, poor therapeutic index; signiﬁcant
sedation at all dose levels
Novel inhibitors developed with preclinical evidence of greater
selectivity over existing molecules; licensed to Alkermes, 1992

my third year at Cortex, we formed a joint-development program for
our calpain inhibitor program with Alkermes, a more-mature biopharmaceutical company with better ﬁnancial resources. Within a
year after the agreement was initiated, Alkermes elected to take full
control of the calpain program and offered me a position to join the
company as Sr. VP of preclinical R&D. My responsibilities were to continue leading the effort to develop the calpain inhibitors, while also
directing a planned expansion of Alkermes' neuroscience effort,
which included a program speciﬁcally focused on translating neurotrophic factors to treat neurodegenerative diseases. The opportunities
and challenges involved in leading a translational program that
focused on neurotrophic factors were a key factor in my decision to
join Alkermes.

Transporting NGF across the BBB for treating Alzheimer's disease
At the time, Alkermes was focused on developing novel methods
of surpassing the BBB (blood–brain barrier) to enable potentially
valuable therapeutics into the brain. The technology underlying
their neurotrophic program was based, in large part, on the seminal
work and patents of William Pardridge (UCLA), who pioneered the
concept of using endogenous BBB transport systems, such as transferrin receptors that normally transport iron from the blood into the
brain, as a means to carry therapeutic agents across the BBB
(Pardridge et al., 1991). This approach offered a possible solution to
the realization that if NGF or other neurotrophic factors were ever
to be developed as therapeutics, effective delivery methods would
have to be developed. Alkermes' program involved the use of a proprietary chemical construct, consisting of an antibody fragment to
the transferrin receptor, chemically conjugated to NGF. The wellknown, biologically characterized neurotrophic properties of NGF,
coupled to a means of transporting it across the BBB using an endogenous transport system, seemed to represent an interesting, practical
and potentially important translational opportunity.
The program had even greater personal appeal to me, in that the
intended indication for NGF was Alzheimer's disease, with the therapeutic target being the same degenerating cholinergic neurons that
served as the focus for the ‘cholinergic hypothesis’ I had helped conceive and establish a decade earlier. I was well-aware that signiﬁcant
dose-limiting toxicity (primarily GI-related) blunted the efﬁcacy that
might otherwise be achieved with the cholinesterase inhibitors in
clinical development at the time (and since approved). The problem
was, at least in part, related to the lack of speciﬁcity of those drugs
for the degenerating cholinergic neurons in the targeted basal forebrain, coupled with the ubiquitous distribution of healthy cholinergic
neurons in the peripheral, parasympathetic nervous system (and also
other regions of the brain). Thus, the use of parenteral cholinergic
pharmaceuticals to correct the central cholinergic deﬁcit linked to
the early cognitive deﬁcits of AD was proving to pose serious obstacles that limited the clinical beneﬁt, with no clear solution at hand.
This problem has not been solved more than 30 years after the conceptualization of the cholinergic hypothesis, emphasizing how difﬁcult and challenging many translational issues can be.

The idea of enhancing the function of the degenerating cholinergic
neurons with a neurotrophic factor like NGF that would selectively target the degenerating neurons responsible for the major early-stage
symptoms of AD had clear appeal. When I joined Alkermes, the data
that supported the concept involved the demonstration that the NGF/
transferrin-receptor-antibody conjugate (named, AK-26), enhanced
the survival of neonatal cholinergic neurons transplanted into the ocular chamber of an adult rat's eye (Friden et al., 1993). Since the transplanted tissue developed a surrogate BBB in the vitreal chamber, it
served as a model for testing whether agents normally excluded could
now cross the BBB due to their conjugation to the carrier. While the results published in that study with NGF supported the potential promise
of the concept, it left many large, lingering questions that remained to
be addressed before the approach might advance to a genuine ‘development’ program, let alone translated to clinical testing. Foremost of these
was the nagging concern that Alkermes and its collaborators had been
unable to demonstrate consistent or robust efﬁcacy of the systemically
administered NGF conjugate in the ‘gold standard’ in vivo model for
NGF, the ‘ﬁmbria–fornix transection’ model (or FFX model) of cholinergic degeneration. Hefti and others had shown that when the axons of
septo-hippocampal cholinergic axons are severed, the neurons quickly
degenerate and lose their ability to express phenotypic markers, but
with elevated concentrations of NGF, the degenerating neurons are restored, regaining their morphology and expression of functional proteins in these neurons. The failure to achieve more reliable and robust
results with AK-26 in the FFX model raised serious concerns that
deﬁned one of several key issues that required additional focused research to try to resolve before this technological approach might advance to a genuine development program.
Over a period of several years, working with several different collaborators, nonclinical proof-of-concept was gradually established for
this approach. It was established that systemically (IV) administered
AK-26 (i.e., NGF conjugated to a transferrin receptor antibody)
could be transported across the BBB to provide neurotrophic support
for degenerating cholinergic neurons in a variety of animal models
(Backman et al., 1996, 1997; Bartus, 1999; Bartus et al., 1996a;
Charles et al., 1996; Kordower et al., 1994). However, the magnitude
of the trophic response was often not as great as that achieved with
NGF infusions directly into the brain and we were never able to ﬁnd
clear evidence for neuroprotection by AK-26 in the FFX model. In
the end, the relatively modest beneﬁts, as well as the lack of an explanation for the failure to achieve reliable and signiﬁcant effects in the
FFX model gave many of us pause for concern. Eventually, those concerns, coupled with the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant side effects (e.g.,
inﬂammation and pain) induced by exposing peripheral tissue to
high levels of AK-26 made continued development of this program
impractical and it was unceremoniously terminated.
As the focus on neurodegenerative diseases increased during the socalled ‘decade of the brain’, which coincided with the gradual emergence of biopharmaceuticals (including neurotrophic factors) as potentially important new treatments, appreciation also increased for the
obstacles posed by the BBB. Three other innovative technologies at
Alkermes offered additional possibilities to address the delivery problems posed by proteins, generally, and neurotrophic factors, speciﬁcally.

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

159

Table 3
Major translational R&D programs in Specialized Biopharma (1992–2002: Alkermes).
Product

Mechanism

Indication(s)

Stage of development/status

Calpain inhibitors

Potent selective inhibitors of neutral,
calcium-dependent protease

Acute and chronic neurodegenerative
diseases

Preclinical proof of concept; program
discontinued due to lack of sufﬁcient
bioavailability into brain; 1995

Nerve growth factor (NGF)

Transferrin receptor antibody
conjugated to NGF enabling passage
across the BBB

Alzheimer's disease

Non-clinical proof of concept, program
terminated; 1995

Sustained hGH

Injectable formulation of essential
growth factor; provides sustained
blood levels for 1 week following
single injection

hGH deﬁciency; small stature. Technology
also tested, but not practical for delivering
neurotrophic factors to brain.

Approved by FDA; 1999

Cereport (RMP-7) BBB
permeabilizer

B2 bradykinin agonist that modulates
opening of tight junctions comprising
the BBB

Initially all BBB possibilities; later glioma
focus. Technology found not suitable for
neurotrophic factors to brain

Phase 2b — discontinued, 1999, due to change
in regulatory climate and corporate priorities

Pulmonary triptans

Formulation/route provides far faster
and more reliable blood levels, also
avoids problems related to gastric
slowing during migraine attacks.
All features provide potentially
greater efﬁcacy

Migraine

Concept conceived and pilot data established
feasibility, 2000. Program moth-balled, but
nearly identical pulmonary product concept
now developed by Vectura Group. Also, MAP
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. successfully completed
Phase 3 trials in 2011 with similar pulmonary
DHE product.

Pulmonary ﬂurbiprophen

Formulation/route provides far faster
and more reliable blood levels,
potentially providing greater efﬁcacy

Break-through pain

Nonclinical proof of concept established, 2000.
Program moth-balled 2002.

Pulmonary epinephrine

Bronchial modulator provides far faster
blood levels and is less invasive
(compared to Epi injectable pen)

Anaphylaxis

Phase 1 — ‘mothballed’, 2002; later licensed
by Civitas Therapeutics

Pulmonary L-dopa

Formulation of dopamine precursor
provides more rapid and reliable
blood levels

Rescue therapy for PD

Non-clinical POC established, 2001; program
initially mothballed but licensed by Civitas
Therapeutics and now their lead program

Pulmonary diazepam

Formulation/route provides far faster
and reliable blood levels, potentially
providing greater efﬁcacy

Epilepsy

Concept conceived and pilot data established
feasibility, 2001. Program moth-balled in 2002
but similar product concept (using nasal route)
now being developed by Acorda Therapeutics

Vivitrol

Once/month injectable formulation
of naltrexone providing more consistent
blood levels, while avoiding daily patient
adherence issues

Alcohol and opiate abuse

Approved by FDA; 2006

Pulmonary zolpidem

Formulation/route provides far
faster and reliable blood levels,
potentially providing greater efﬁcacy

Sleep maintenance insomnia
(or ‘middle of the night waking’)

Concept conceived and pilot data established
feasibility, 2001. Program moth-balled 2002.
Transcept, Inc. independently received FDA
approval for similar product concept (using
sublingual route) in 2011

Risperdal Consta

Injectable formulation of atypical
antipsychotic, provides sustained
release of therapeutic for
2 weeks/injection

Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder

Approved in US and EU; 2003

Bydureon

Injectable formulation of insulin-use
modulator, Byetta, provides sustained
release of therapeutic for
2 weeks/injection

Diabetes

Approved in EU and US; 2011 and 2012,
respectively

While none of these programs ultimately solved the formidable delivery problems posed by neurotrophic factors, as discussed later, they
and other programs at Alkermes (see Table 3) nonetheless provided invaluable experience with a range of translational R&D issues, including
direct involvement with, and input in, regulatory and clinical activities
(an opportunity that more often exists in smaller, development-stage
companies versus larger Big Pharma, because team members are often
required to wear many ‘different hats’, work in very intimate multidisciplinary teams and extend their efforts well outside their areas of
formal training and past experience).

Opening the BBB (blood brain barrier) by relaxing the tight junctions
One program Alkermes had developed to overcome delivery obstacles posed by the BBB involved the use of a chemically-synthesized,
novel bradykinin B2 receptor agonist to transiently relax the tight junctions comprising the BBB, thus temporarily opening it to permit high
concentrations of a systemically circulating therapeutic agent to cross
into the brain (Bartus, 1999; Bartus et al., 1996b, 1996c). In principle,
this technology might provide another means to circumvent the BBB
to allow neurotrophic factors to reach their CNS targets. However, as

160

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

more was learned about the phenomenon of relaxing the tight junctions
by activating the B2 receptors located on the luminal surface of
brain capillaries, it became increasingly clear that neurotrophic factor
proteins would not beneﬁt; the increased permeability achieved was
limited to smaller molecules (i.e., less than 10 kDa) and lasted only 5
to 10 min before the BBB spontaneously reformed via tachyphylaxis
(Bartus et al., 1999; 2000; Elliott et al., 1996; Inamura et al., 1994).
Thus, while we advanced the RMP-7 program into several clinical
studies in glioma patients, including controlled trials in both Europe
and the United States (Bartus, 1999; Emerich et al., 2001), it did not provide a solution for the problems of delivering neurotrophic factors to
the brain.
Sustained release of protein as alternative delivery method
Another major technological innovation at Alkermes involved the
ability to formulate therapeutically beneﬁcial molecules, including proteins (and therefore neurotrophic factors), into injectable, biodegradable polymeric microspheres. Once so-formulated and injected into
the body (including the brain), the polymers comprising the microspheres gradually dissolve into innocuous monomers, slowly releasing
the therapeutic agent in a reasonably sustained fashion. The ability to
encapsulate proteins for sustained release following injection provided
yet another possible technological opportunity to overcome some of the
delivery issues of neurotrophic factors by providing long-lasting beneﬁt
following an injection of the neurotrophic factor (Bartus et al., 1998).
We launched a small pilot project intended to explore whether NGFladen microspheres might be stereotactically injected into the brain to
achieve sustained levels of NGF and provide sustained neuroprotection.
It soon became clear, however, that even though one could produce sustained release of NGF in the brain, it was not possible to achieve a sufﬁciently large amount of neurotrophic factor, into a sufﬁciently small
microsphere mass to provide a sufﬁciently sustained neurotrophic beneﬁt. In short, the duration of effect achieved with a microsphere mass
that could be injected into the brain without causing physical stress
was too short to achieve a duration of neurotrophic activity sufﬁciently
long to justify the neurosurgical interventions required to maintain
neurotrophic activity for chronic neurodegenerative diseases. While
this represented another disappointing outcome, in terms of translating
neurotrophic factors, this ‘sustained release’ technology nonetheless,
again provided the opportunity to continue to gain valuable insight
and translational experience with several other products, including
proteins and biopharmaceuticals (see Table 3) that eventually proved
helpful when later leading the development of CERE-120.
Pilot program involving AAV2-GDNF
A ﬁnal program at Alkermes that was much more directly related
to CERE-120 (AAV-NRTN) was initiated as a small pilot project, investigating whether AAV might be used to deliver GDNF to the degenerating nigrostriatal neurons in a 6-OHDA rat model of PD. This project
was launched by others (Scott Putney, then at Alkermes and Barry
Hoffer, a long-time consultant and collaborator of Alkermes and a pioneer in neurotrophic factor research), primarily to help determine
whether Alkermes might eventually pursue gene transfer as an alternative means of delivering proteins for therapeutic purposes. An SBIR
(Small Business Innovation Research) grant was awarded to help support the work and I was later given responsibility to manage the grant
and personnel performing the research for its ﬁnal 1.5 years. Ironically, my conﬁdence and interest in gene therapy as a viable translational approach were admittedly not great at the time. Not only did the
approach seem to me to be relatively complicated, uncontrolled and variable (compared to more traditional biopharmaceutical technologies),
but safety issues generated by others in the ﬁeld (Kohn et al., 2003;
Raper et al., 2003), along with relatively poor outcomes in the initial
studies at Alkermes, left me unimpressed and generally skeptical.

However, the experience did serve to introduce me to the concept of
gene transfer, and eventually the project was able to generate results
worthy of publication (McGrath et al., 2002).
At this point in time, I had spent nearly 30 years engaged in translational research and development in Big Pharma and specialized biopharmaceutical companies and even though I was privileged to have
participated on numerous teams that had successfully discovered and
developed many different novel products, none of the neurotrophic factor programs had proven to be sufﬁciently strong to merit advancing
into clinical development (Tables 2 and 3). And while the 15 years in
Biotech, especially the 10 years at Alkermes, provided widespread
translational experience with nonclinical, clinical and regulatory issues
by virtue of the number of concepts we were attempting to develop
into programs to advance into human clinical testing (Table 3), this
experience made it clear that the delivery issues ﬁrst described nearly
25 years earlier for biopharmaceuticals (including neurotrophic factors) were presenting even greater and more difﬁcult challenges than
I or likely anyone else had imagined (Box 1).
I was now convinced that if neurotrophic factors were ever going to
be successfully translated to the clinic, the delivery obstacles needed to
be addressed head-on, and this would likely require a truly innovative,
possibly revolutionary approach. My experience at Alkermes had convinced me that even the most sophisticated methods currently available
at the time for delivering puriﬁed proteins into the brain were not likely
to solve the multitude of overlapping delivery problems and obstacles
that existed for neurotrophic factor proteins. Even though many of us
interested in neurotrophic factors had gradually become comfortable
with the likely need for stereotactic neurosurgical methods to deliver
neurotrophic factors, I was not yet entirely convinced that gene transfer
provided the critical ‘enabling’ technological innovation, especially
given its level of complexity (relative to more traditional pharmaceutical approaches) as well as its past safety record. Moreover, I was still in
the midst of developing additional novel products and product concepts
that I felt were interesting and represented important potential advances, including Vivitrol for alcoholism and opiate abuse (Bartus et
al., 2003; Overstreet et al., 1999), pulmonary L-dopa for rescue therapy
for PD (Bartus et al., 2004), pulmonary triptans and NSIADs for migraine
and breakthrough pain (Salzberg-Brenhouse et al., 2003), pulmonary
diazepam for acute epilepsy attacks, pulmonary zaleplon for sleep
maintenance insomnia, and several others (see Table 3) and thus initially resisted considering the idea very seriously. However, over time the
opportunity to focus exclusively on translating neurotrophic factors as
viable clinical products became too compelling and thus looking back,
now a decade later, the possibility that gene transfer could make all
the difference in the world is exactly the bet that I eventually would
make.
‘Delivery to the brain: the problem lurking behind the problem’
If neurotrophic factors indeed have such therapeutic potential,
why have so many attempts been unsuccessful, to date? Or, more
to the point of this section, what is it about neurotrophic factors
and their potential use as therapeutics for chronic neurodegenerative
diseases that make their delivery to targeted neuronal populations so
difﬁcult?
Over the past two decades, numerous clinical trials involving several different neurotrophic factors and neurodegenerative diseases
have been conducted (Apfel, 2002; Apfel et al., 1998, 2000; Gill et
al., 2003; Jonhagen et al., 1998; Lang et al., 2006; Marks et al., 2008;
Miller et al., 1996; Nutt et al., 2003; Penn et al., 1997; Slevin et al.,
2005; Tuszynski et al., 2005; Wellmer et al., 2001), and yet the quality
and magnitude of any claimed successes do not yet allow one to declare victory from a translational point of view. More speciﬁcally, despite multiple clinical tests involving several different neurotrophic
factors and neurodegenerative diseases, until gene transfer, no clear
evidence of sufﬁcient, robust clinical efﬁcacy has yet been achieved

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

161

Box 3
Delivery obstacles posed by neurotrophic factors and deficiencies with traditional pharmaceutical delivery approaches.
Neurotrophic factors pose a number of unique and difficult delivery issues. First, they must target the brain, which is somewhat sequestered
from the main circulatory system by the tight junctions between the endothelial cells comprising the cerebral vessels, known as the blood–
brain barrier (BBB). A further complication for treating chronic neurodegenerative diseases is that adequate levels of neurotrophic factors must
be maintained for very long periods of time (i.e., for years), for once the proteins return to basal levels, their benefit typically reverses and is lost
(Fischer et al., 1987; Hefti et al., 1989; Snider and Johnson, 1989; Sofroniew et al., 2001). Similarly, it is important that a sufficient proportion of the degenerating cell population be exposed to the neurotrophic factor in order to produce effective restoration of neuronal function and
thus achieve measureable clinical improvement (though the exact proportion required for therapeutic benefit is currently not clear and likely
varies between situations). Because serious side effects have been observed when delivery of neurotrophic factors have inadvertently exposed non-targeted brain sites (e.g., periventricular tissue) it is important to accurately predict, control and restrict protein delivery specifically
to the intended target (Day-Lollini et al., 1997; Eriksdotter Jonhagen et al., 1998; Kordower et al., 1999; Nauta et al., 1999; Nutt et al., 2003;
Penn et al., 1997). Further complicating the translation of neurotrophic factors, they are proteins and chronic protein delivery can be notoriously difficult because of aggregation, misfolding and development of neutralizing antibodies. Moreover, as proteins, they cannot be taken
orally, do not cross blood–brain barrier (BBB) naturally and cannot typically be administered systemically, even if linked to a BBB carrier,
due to side effects often associated with exposing systemic organs and tissue (McMahon, 1996; Pezet and McMahon, 2006). These issues,
individually and collectively, render safe and effective delivery of neurotrophic factors extremely challenging. For this reason, a consensus
opinion has emerged that the successful translation of neurotrophic factors to the human clinic will first require that these crucial delivery issues be solved (Bartus et al., 2007a; Kordower et al., 1999; Lang et al., 2006; Nutt et al., 2003; Salvatore et al., 2006; Sherer et al., 2006).
Unfortunately, traditional pharmaceutical formulations and delivery approaches are unable to solve these multiple problems. For this reason, a number of more innovative methods have been attempted to deliver neurotrophic factor proteins to the CNS, but none has proven
successful. For example, various means of transporting neurotrophic factors across the BBB following systemic administration have been
attempted. One method that showed early promise exploited endogenous transport receptor-mediated systems located on the abluminal
surface of cerebral capillaries (e.g., transferrin transport receptors), described earlier in the Specialized Biopharma section, but thus ultimately proved impractical due to serious side effects induced by exposing non-targeted tissue outside the brain to the neurotrophic factor
following intravenous injections (e.g., see McMahon, 1996; Pezet and McMahon, 2006), coupled with only-modest benefit. Infusions of
neurotrophic factor proteins directly into the ventricles of the brain showed promise in animal studies of neurodegeneration but significant
side effects in humans occurred when periventricular tissue was exposed to high concentrations of the neurotrophic factor (Eriksdotter
Jonhagen et al., 1998; Kordower et al., 1999; Nauta et al., 1999, 2003; Penn et al., 1997). Subsequent infusions of the proteins directly
into the degenerating parenchyma using chronically indwelling pumps and cannula reduced some, but not all safety issues (Hovland et al.,
2007; Lang et al., 2006). However, results from these efforts have been mixed, at best (Gill et al., 2003; Lang et al., 2006; Slevin et al.,
2005), with the single, controlled study of GDNF in PD showing no evidence of any real benefit (Lang et al., 2006). Many have concluded
that the point source used to deliver the protein in those studies produced poor distribution throughout the putamen, at least partly contributing to the negative results (Lang et al., 2006; Morrison et al., 2007; Salvatore et al., 2006; Sherer et al., 2006). Supporting this concern is the argument made in the seminal paper reporting positive, preliminary results with GDNF (Gill et al., 2003), wherein even the
authors of that study concluded that a better means of delivering the protein into the brain was required than that provided by the chronically indwelling hardware and cannula that they used (Gill et al., 2003). Moreover, even if that technology could be improved to provide
more wide-spread distribution of the protein, documented complications associated with the use of indwelling hardware warn of continuing, serious safety risks. These include the formation of neutralizing antibodies to GDNF (Hovland et al., 2007; Lang et al., 2006) (most
likely due to the protein leaking during routine filling of the subdermally implanted infusion pump) and apparent degeneration of distant
cerebellar neurons (most likely due to protein leaking along paths of lease resistance, formed by the implanted cannula, from the targeted
putamen to the surface of the brain and eventually to the distant cerebellum) (Hovland et al., 2007). In other words, while the scientific
foundation for neurotrophic factors extends several decades and is considered well-established, attempts to translate the therapeutic potential to the clinical arena has been largely disappointing because the technology required to deliver these complex proteins in a safe, controlled and sustained fashion to specific, targeted areas of the brain has been grossly inadequate.

in a controlled clinical trial to convincingly establish that neurotrophic factors can clearly improve the clinical status in any neurodegenerative disease, let alone delay its progression.
Fortunately, during the two decades of clinical trials attempting to
translate the therapeutic potential of neurotrophic factors, much has
been learned about their biology and translational requirements.
This cumulative insight provides important details about the obstacles that must be confronted and solved before neurotrophic factors
might be developed as successful human therapeutics. Many of
these issues and the continuing difﬁculties posed in delivering neurotrophic factors to the human brain are summarized in Box 3.
Thus, while the editorial cited in Box 1 (“Delivery to the brain: the
problem lurking behind the problem”) accurately forewarned that a
major translational stumbling block for neurotrophic factors might involve the successful delivery to the brain, that concern has proven far
more prescient than I or anyone would have had reason to believe at

the time. Similarly, even today, while no one can be certain that solving
these long-standing delivery issues will necessarily produce clear clinical beneﬁt to patients receiving neurotrophic factors, it had became increasingly clear to me by the time I was leaving Alkermes that unless
the delivery problems were solved, reliable and meaningful clinical
beneﬁts of neurotrophic factors would likely never be achieved.
The new millennium in Biotech: personally going “all in” to
translate neurotrophic factors, using gene transfer as the means
to overcome the long-standing delivery issues
Background
Ceregene was founded in 2001, speciﬁcally to develop neurotrophic
factors for neurodegenerative diseases, using gene transfer as the delivery approach. Shortly after Jeff Ostrove (Ceregene's President and ﬁrst

162

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

employee) joined the company, he and several SAB members contacted
me about leading the R&D effort. The modest exposure I gained to gene
therapy via the pilot AAV-GDNF project at Alkermes gave me some
personal appreciation that the technology might have the potential to
solve some of the more difﬁcult delivery challenges that plagued the
neurotrophic ﬁeld. While several published accounts had, importantly,
demonstrated that gene therapy could deliver neurotrophic factors to
produce efﬁcacy in animal models of neurodegeneration (e.g.,
Aebischer et al., 1996; Bensadoun et al., 2000; Bjorklund et al., 2000;
Bohn, 1999; Choi-Lundberg et al., 1998; Kirik et al., 2000b; Kordower
et al., 2000; McGrath et al., 2002; Tuszynski et al., 1996)), no paper
yet adequately addressed the many formidable translational issues
that persisted. These issues included: (1) whether gene therapy could
prove to be sufﬁciently safe (a concern we at Ceregene learned was
shared by many in the venture capital community as we attempted to
raise necessary funding for the company a year later), (2) whether
gene therapy could accurately express proteins in targeted sites in the
CNS in a sufﬁciently predictable, controlled and effective fashion, and
(3) whether protein expression via gene therapy would necessarily
eliminate many of the problems that historically plagued efforts to
chronically deliver proteins, including protein aggregation, formation
of neutralizing antibodies and the need for sustained bioactivity over
long periods of time. Thus, while many investigators had already established that gene transfer could provide the means to generate positive
neurotrophic responses in animal models of neurodegeneration (e.g.,
Aebischer et al., 1996; Bensadoun et al., 2000; Bjorklund et al., 2000;
Bohn, 1999; Kordower et al., 2000; McGrath et al., 2002; Tuszynski et
al., 1996), it seemed apparent that if this approach were ever to advance
to human clinical testing it still remained to be determined whether
gene transfer was also able to satisfy many fundamentally important
translational hurdles that had mostly remained untested by the community. In essence, the litany of concerns I had when considering the
opportunity to join Ceregene soon formed the basis of a translational
R&D strategy designed to carefully test whether the approach could
be responsibly used to deliver neurotrophic factors to the brains of
human volunteer patients and beyond.
Though still not entirely convinced that gene transfer could safely
and effectively deliver neurotrophic factors to the CNS at the time I
joined Ceregene in late 2002, I was now willing to take on the challenge to help design and execute an R&D strategy intended to deﬁne
the therapeutic opportunities and limitations of the technology. Relatively soon after joining the company, my responsibilities were formally expanded to include all nonclinical, clinical, regulatory and
quality control activities. The company was already actively developing AAV2-NGF (CERE-110) for Alzheimer's disease when I joined, and
while it had decided to add a Parkinson's disease program involving
AAV2-NRTN (CERE-120), the viral construct had not yet been made,
nor had any animal models or a product development strategy been
successfully established. Thus, I inherited the opportunity to be

involved on the ground level in the conceptualization and development of CERE-120 for PD. Within a few years, we had added several
more programs to Ceregene's portfolio, all of which used AAV to deliver a neurotrophic factor to a speciﬁc neuronal population responsible for the major symptoms involved with a serious medical disease
(Table 4). The simplicity of this concept and the economies of scale
it provided enabled a small, development-stage company like Ceregene, to construct a true portfolio of several different product
candidates.
The focus on Parkinson's disease and potential value of neurturin (NRTN)
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic, debilitating disease whose
major symptoms involve loss of motor ability, including bradykinesia,
tremors and problems with gait and balance. It is widely recognized
that these major symptoms result from the progressive loss of function and eventual death of the nigrostriatal dopamine neurons.
While available pharmaceutical agents for Parkinson's disease are
generally effective during the earlier stages of the disease, as the disease progresses, the beneﬁt of existing treatments eventually wanes.
In time, this leaves patients unable to initiate or control movement
during major portions of each day (i.e., ‘wearing off’ phenomenon),
while simultaneously causing disabling, drug-related dyskinesias
due to the development of peak-dose sensitivity. While deep brain
stimulation (DBS), which involves a neurosurgical procedure and implantation of chronically indwelling hardware, offers temporary relief
of certain motor symptoms, it often occurs with signiﬁcant complications (Deuschl et al., 2006) and does not provide satisfactory beneﬁt
to many PD patients. No current treatment, including DBS, is able to
slow disease progression. In contrast, the therapeutic potential of
neurotrophic factors to improve the symptoms and delay disease progression of neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's, has
been appreciated for decades (see earlier sections) (Apfel et al.,
2000; Eriksdotter Jonhagen et al., 1998; Mufson et al., 1999; Seiger
et al., 1993). Neurturin is a naturally-occurring protein that has
potent neurotrophic effects on midbrain dopamine neurons, including those originating in the nigra that degenerate in PD (Kotzbauer
et al., 1996). It is a close structural and functional analog of glia cell
line derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), which prior to Ceregene,
had been the focus of the vast majority of basic and clinical research
related to neurotrophic factor treatment for PD, suggesting potential
therapeutic value for treating the degenerating nigrostriatal dopamine neurons (e.g., Gash, et al., 1995; 1996; Hoffer, et al., 1994).
Gene transfer as an ‘enabling technology’
Gene transfer (sometimes also called ‘gene therapy’) involves the
use of a harmless viral vector to deliver the gene for the therapeutic
protein directly to a targeted site so that the cells in close proximity

Table 4
Major translational R&D programs in biotech (2002–present: Ceregene).
Product

Mechanism

Indication

Stage of development/status

CERE-110 (AAV2-NGF)

Trophic factor for basal forebrain cholinergic neurons

Alzheimer's disease

Controlled multicenter Phase 2 ongoing

CERE-120 (AAV2-NRTN)

Trophic factor for midbrain dopamine neurons

Parkinson's disease

Clinical proof of concept established in Phase 2a; dosing
completed in revised multicenter controlled Phase 2b
trial — assessments ongoing

CERE-120 (AAV2-NRTN)

Trophic factor for striatal neurons

Huntington disease

Non-clinical proof of concept established

CERE-130/135 (AAV2-IGF1)

Trophic factor for spinal cord motor neurons
innervating musculature

ALS

Non-clinical proof of concept established

CERE-140 (AAV2-NT4)

Tropic factor for retinal cells (i.e., rods, cones and
ganglion cells)

Multiple serious ocular
diseases causing blindness

Non-clinical proof of concept established

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

to that site will be transduced and programmed to express and secrete the protein in a continuous, long-term fashion. Thus, rather
than attempting to exogenously deliver the large, 3-dimensionallycomplex protein directly to the targeted site, the gene for the protein
is delivered to the targeted site, thereby inducing local cells to manufacture and secrete the protein through their endogenous systems.
Gene transfer has emerged as a practical means of potentially
overcoming all the obstacles associated with delivering neurotrophic
factors to the brain, thus possibly providing the ‘enabling’ technology
required for translating the use of these proteins into viable biotherapeutics for human neurodegenerative diseases. While the need for
standard stereotactic surgical techniques does require a ‘paradigm
shift’ from the way human diseases have traditionally been treated,
the magnitude of the problems posed by neurodegenerative diseases
demands that truly innovative approaches be given serious consideration. The progress made by DBS, both in terms of improved patient
status as well as patient and care-giver acceptance, offers compelling
evidence that neurosurgical approaches can be both effective and
practical. The indwelling hardware and other esoteric aspects of
DBS arguably makes it a more complicated and invasive approach
than gene transfer, which based on current data will likely involve a
single, once-per-lifetime surgical, dosing procedure. Despite the clinical beneﬁts of DBS and its deserved, growing acceptance, it has no
impact on the underlying pathogenesis and thus does nothing to
slow disease progression, falling well short of the true promise embodied in a neurotrophic factor/gene transfer approach. Thus, the
collective characteristics of safe, very long-term, controlled protein
expression that can be targeted to speciﬁc sites or systems seems to
support that idea that gene transfer may have ﬁnally solved the delivery problems for neurotrophic factors.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) has emerged as a favorite vector for
translational purposes for several important reasons. One of the most
important of these is that AAV2 is naturally replication-deﬁcient and
does not easily or normally integrate into the host chromosome, thus
greatly reducing the possibility for insertional mutagenesis. Most authorities agree it generally provides potentially life-long expression of
the protein in the targeted area of the body following a single administration of the viral vector (Hadaczek et al., 2010; McCown, 2011). Finally, AAV is only weakly immunogenic and has not been associated
with any human disease or symptoms (despite the majority of
humans having been exposed to it naturally). In sum, with over 80
clinical protocols initiated and more than 1000 patients administered
a variety of AAV gene transfer constructs, AAV has gradually gained
acceptance as a generally safe and effective means of delivering therapeutic proteins in a sustained, long-lasting fashion (Journal of Gene
Therapy: http://www.wiley.com//legacy/wileychi/genmed/clinical).
The design and construction of CERE-120 (AAV-NRTN) as a novel gene
therapy product for PD
CERE-120 is a gene delivery construct comprising a geneticallyengineered, adeno-associated virus serotype-2 (AAV2) vector that
lacks all of the viral protein-coding sequences and thus encodes
only the human neurturin (NRTN) cDNA (Gasmi et al., 2007b). From
the outset, the design, methods, materials and controls used to create
and manufacture CERE-120 were focused on providing a safe and effective product for human use. Similarly, as reviewed in more detail
in later sections, an extensive nonclinical program was launched to
thoroughly test CERE-120 for expression patterns and kinetics, safety
and bioactivity/efﬁcacy and when unusual or unexpected ﬁndings
were uncovered, every effort was made to understand them so that
nothing would be left to chance or bias that might impact human safety
or the likely viability of the product. This is the main reason why over
two dozen nonclinical studies were conducted with CERE-120, the majority of which were launched well before the ﬁrst human subject was
ever dosed.

163

The genome encompassed in CERE-120 consists of AAV2 inverted
terminal repeats (ITRs) ﬂanking a NRTN expression cassette containing a CAG promoter (consisting of a human cytomegalovirus (CMV)
enhancer, chicken B-actin gene and rabbit B-globin gene slice acceptor), the human mature NRTN cDNA fused to the human β-nerve
growth factor (βNGF) pre/pro sequence, and a human growth hormone
gene (hGH) polyadenylation signal. The substitution of the natural pre–
pro sequence with the efﬁcient human NGF pre–pro signal sequence
was done to assure efﬁcient secretion of NRTN from the transduced
cells, which the natural NRTN pre–pro sequence was not able to provide
(Gasmi et al., 2007b; see later section titled ‘Key translational issues
confronted’).
As has been well-established for all AAV2 vectors, the genome
does not integrate into the host chromosome, but rather forms a
stable episome within the nucleus, enabling the single-stranded
NRTN DNA comprised in CERE-120 to pair with its complimentary sequence, producing continuous NRTN protein expression. Studies in
cell culture and brain established that CERE-120-mediated NRTN is
selectively expressed in neurons, with immunohistochemical staining
demonstrating that over 99% of all NRTN-positive cells were also positive for the neuron-speciﬁc antibody, Neu-N and negative for all other
cell types, including numerous glia markers. However, in clear contrast
to the published dogma in the ﬁeld, our studies demonstrate that AAV
does not selectively transduce neurons, for when we substituted the
typical CAG promoter with the glia-speciﬁc GFAP promoter, glia cells
now expressed the transgene protein, but not neurons (Ceregene,
unpublished results). In other words, by merely changing the promoter
(and leaving all elements of the AAV2 vector construct identical), one
can completely alter the cell type in which protein expression occurs.
Thus, these data indicate that both neurons and glia must be transduced
by AAV2 but that the promoter determines whether or not the transgene will be expressed in a speciﬁc cell type.
AAV2-NRTN (CERE-120) was intended to overcome all the delivery issues discussed earlier by circumventing the major obstacles associated with delivering sustained quantities of biologically active
proteins into selectively-targeted brain tissue. It is designed to deliver
the gene for NRTN to targeted neurons, programming these neurons
to provide continuous, long-term, controlled protein expression in selective, stereotactically-targeted regions of the brain. An important
element that predicted the safety of CERE-120 is that, in contrast to
many prior instances where serious side effects have been observed
with gene therapy, only relatively small quantities of vector are required to provide relatively widespread coverage of the targeted
putamen with NRTN protein. Additionally, signiﬁcant systemic exposure is avoided, as is non-targeted exposure of other neuronal sites.
Finally, because the CNS is relatively immunologically privileged
and AAV2 is relatively non-inﬂammatory, the probability of eliciting
an immune or inﬂammatory reaction is further reduced.
At the same time, the opportunity for robust, long-lasting therapeutic effects to treat chronic neurodegenerative diseases following
a single CERE-120 administration seemed plausible with AAV2 in
combination with the transcriptionally active CAG promoter, for research from other laboratories had shown this combination provided
continuous, persistent expression of the transgene protein over several
years (Bankiewicz et al., 2006) (an observation since replicated with
CERE-120). Thus, CERE-120 was intended to provide a life-time of
NRTN-mediated neurotrophic factor support following a single administration, offering additional safety advantages as well as eliminating
numerous inconveniences associated with repeat surgical procedures.
The initial CERE-120 non-clinical program
Introduction
The targeting approach for delivering CERE-120 (and thus NRTN) to
the degenerating nigrostriatal neurons adopted the prevailing viewpoint that it was not necessary (and possibly counter-productive) to

164

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

deliver neurotrophic factors directly to the degenerating nigral cell bodies located deep in the substantia nigra, for many studies had shown
that administering the factor to the terminal ﬁelds in the striatum was
both necessary and sufﬁcient (e.g., Kirik, et al., 2000a; for a detailed discussion of this issue, see Bartus et al., 2011a, 2011b). Thus, the initial
nonclinical program adopted that approach, administering CERE-120
to the striatum to evaluate several translational characteristics essential
to justify, support and guide eventual clinical testing in Parkinson's
patients using the same striatal-dosing approach.
The ﬁrst and most obvious characteristic evaluated was whether the
NRTN expressed following CERE-120 administration provided robust
neurotrophic support for nigrostriatal dopamine neurons, improving
their function and protecting against degeneration. In essence, this
was the easiest and most straight-forward component of the entire
nonclinical program, for it merely required replicating what others
had already established for other neurotrophic factors (especially
GDNF) using gene therapy (see prior sections and papers cited). Beyond
that, a number of other important translational questions remained to
be answered for which little data yet existed for any neurotrophic factor, whether delivered via viral vectors or other means. For example,
could CERE-120 be delivered safely, for sufﬁciently long periods of
time and with a sufﬁciently wide therapeutic index (i.e., ratio between
dose required for efﬁcacy versus dose when side effects are noted) to
justify advancing the program to clinical testing in chronic PD patients
who would require years, if not decades of therapeutic beneﬁt? This
issue was greatly complicated by the heightened sensitivity to the possible safety risks associated with injecting viral vectors into humans,
due to some of the early, unrelated safety issues experienced in the
gene therapy ﬁeld, brieﬂy referred to earlier. This concern was further
exacerbated because we intended to inject CERE-120 directly into the
brain and once administered, could not suspend protein expression if
any serious side effects were to develop (while ‘regulatable’ vectors
were under development at the time, none were considered sufﬁciently
advanced to provide a practical solution to this problem, and indeed
none has yet advanced into clinical testing, now almost a decade later;
see the following section for more details). Other questions for which

very little data existed in the ﬁeld, but were equally important for translational purposes, involved whether protein expression followed a predictable and orderly dose–response and thus whether the amount of
protein, as well as its location and pattern of expression, could be
adequately controlled. Finally, it was also important to establish that
the NRTN expression would remain reasonably consistent over long
periods of time and would not migrate from the targeted site. Of course,
in the course of conducting these studies, it was inevitable that unexpected ﬁndings or novel observations would be made, most of which required experimental follow-up to assure that no uncertainties or
mysteries surrounded the performance or effects of CERE-120 occurred
in animals prior to initiating the ﬁrst-ever tests in human PD subjects.
It was with these issues in mind that the CERE-120 nonclinical
program was developed, implemented and executed. Less than two
years elapsed from the time of CERE-120's construction to the ﬁling
of an IND with the FDA to test CERE-120 in humans. During this
time, 20 separate nonclinical studies (Bartus et al., 2007, 2011a;
Gasmi et al., 2007a, 2007b; Herzog et al., 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011;
Kordower et al., 2006) were initiated (obviously, many in parallel;
see Table 5), serving as a lasting testimony to the talent and commitment of the scientists at Ceregene to advance this program forward as
efﬁciently and responsibly as possible (see Acknowledgment section
for several of the most outstanding). During this time, we were confronted with a number of unexpected, and at times, difﬁcult translational issues that required resolution in order for the program to
advance, thus requiring additional, previously unplanned studies to
be conducted (therefore eventually leading to 20 different nonclinical
studies initiated prior to the start of testing in humans).

Key translational issues confronted
During the course of testing and developing CERE-120, a number
of translational issues and obstacles were encountered, some of
them conceptual (or theoretical) and others empirical, requiring a
fuller understanding of the viral vector's bioactivity. Some of the
more controversial, worrisome or unusual are reviewed, below.

Table 5
Overall summary of CERE-120 non-clinical program.
Striatal targeting
(20 + studies)

Dose related effects

Kinetics (change over time)

Conclusions

NRTN expression

Predictable, dose–response

Stable expression, 1 month after dosing;
no changes up to nearly 2 years later

Predictable, stable, controlled expression

Safety/toxicity

No toxicity at any dose

No short term or longer term toxicity

No evidence of any toxicity at any dose or time
point, even with administration of excessive doses

Bioactivity/‘efﬁcacy’

Dose–response effects dependent on spread (volume)
of protein and area of target covered

Varies with model but persistent beneﬁt
in all instances

Robust efﬁcacy consistently observed on a variety
of animal models and assortment of different
objective endpoints

Nigral targeting
(8 additional studies)

Dose related effects

Kinetics (change over time)

Conclusions

NRTN expression

Predictable dose–response, with far better protein
coverage in striatum following nigra targeting,
compared to more conventional striatal targeting

Stable expression after approximately
3 weeks

Broad coverage of substantia nigra, limited to
target area

Safety/toxicity

No serious side effects at any dose; moderate
effects on weight at excessive dose, only — linked
to mistargeted protein far from nigra

No signiﬁcant safety issues at any time
point measured; modest effects on weight
with mistargeted protein seen within
2–3 weeks.

No evidence of any toxicity with properly targeted
NRTN; no serious side effects at any dose

Bioactivity/‘efﬁcacy’

Evidence of superior neurotrophic response with
degenerating neurons following nigra, versus
striatal delivery

No evidence for loss of efﬁcacy

Evidence of superior efﬁcacy with nigra targeting
(compared to terminal ﬁelds, only) when neurons
are undergoing degeneration

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Decision to use a ‘non-regulatable’ vector. One of the ﬁrst decisions we
had to make was whether to try to employ one of the so-called ‘regulatable vectors’ that were under development versus the use of a
vector that would produce steady, unregulated protein expression.
The issue here was both simple and clear: ample published data
existed that an AAV2 vector, when used in conjunction with a CAGlike promoter, would likely provide relatively permanent expression
of the therapeutic protein in the transduced cells. On the one hand,
this characteristic clearly offered potential advantages for any product intended to treat a chronic neurodegenerative disease via a neurosurgical procedure. On the other hand that characteristic raises
understandable safety concerns, in that if any serious side effect
were to emerge from NRTN expression it would be difﬁcult, if not impossible, to halt expression. Thus, this issue was given very serious
consideration at Ceregene, with discussions among the development
team as well as with Ceregene's SAB. Ceregene also had discussions
with a company that was formed speciﬁcally to develop and use regulatable vectors for gene transfer products (Rheogene). In the end, we
decided that none of the available regulatable vectors at the time
were truly ready for clinical development, and collectively concluded
that all of them posed more translational issues and/or as many inherent safety issues as did the use of an unregulatable vector.
Notwithstanding the progress that was being made with regulatable vectors, none of the systems available had yet been shown to be
sufﬁciently safe and effective for human use. Indeed, regulatable promoters require the uncontrolled expression of a ‘regulator protein’,
and thus suffer a potential conceptual ﬂaw that while they are
intended to provide the means to turn on and off the expression of
the therapeutic protein, the regulator protein (required to regulate
gene expression), is itself expressed in an unregulated fashion. The
issue this raises is that the regulator protein could prove to be as
toxic, if not more so, than the therapeutic protein, especially since
very little is often known about the long-term consequences, in
vivo, of expression of any of the regulator proteins known to us at
the time. Since some of them were not mammalian, possible immunogenicity was a very plausible concern. It was relatively easy for us
to test extremely high, excessive doses of CERE-120 to see what safety
liability might lie latent with chronic high levels of NRTN expression.
Fortunately, none could be found (see Safety of CERE-120 section). Finally, the use of regulatable vectors also necessarily carries the additional conceptual liability of requiring inherent ‘polypharmacy’, for it
requires the targeted tissue to be exposed to the therapeutic protein,
as well as the regulator protein and the pharmaceutical agent used to
turn the regulator protein on and off. These characteristics add signiﬁcant complexity to a solution for a concern that was, and still is, largely
hypothetical.
For all of these reasons, Ceregene and its SAB unanimously elected
to move forward without the use of a regulatable feature to our vector. We have since found no safety issues with CERE-120 and neither
the FDA nor any of the seven different European regulatory agencies
we met with to discuss the CERE-120 program raised any concerns
about our use of a ‘non-regulated’ vector (perhaps given the extremely clean safety proﬁle of CERE-120), we did face extremely stiff resistance when we presented our program and plans to the NIH's DNA
Recombinant Advisory Committee (i.e., the so-called “RAC”). Ironically, despite the intense controversy faced many years ago at the RAC
when Ceregene presented its decision to not use a regulatable vector,
no regulatable vector has yet been successfully developed and used in
a single human trial. Rheogene (a company founded speciﬁcally to
develop and implement regulatable vectors) has long-ago disappeared and, most importantly, CERE-120 has not yet been linked to
a single serious side effect in animals or humans. To be clear, when
(and probably, not if) regulatable vectors have been shown to be
clearly safe and effective, they will and should be used for many
translational programs. However, even then, the determination
should be data-driven, based on a careful risk–beneﬁt assessment

165

involving the particular transgene, clinical indication and patient
population. When clinical trials and patient safety are involved, “one
size” never ﬁts all.
Concerns regarding pre-existing antibodies to AAV. A major concern that
existed in the gene therapy ﬁeld prior to launching the CERE-120 program was the impact that preexisting antibodies to the viral vector
might have on performance of the vector, expression of the transgene
or effect to the injected tissue. It was widely recognized that a majority
of people have been exposed to naturally-occurring AAV and that 30 to
60% of humans have neutralizing antibodies to AAV (Calcedo et al.,
2009). What was not clear is the extent to which these neutralizing antibodies might negate the viral vector, or possibly even impair the transduced cells, either rendering the treatment ineffective, or worse yet,
causing a serious inﬂammatory reaction in the brain. One possible solution we considered, which if implemented, would have greatly complicated and possibly compromised later recruitment, would be to ﬁrst
screen all potential subjects for neutralizing antibodies and exclude
them from participating in clinical trials (and thus later exclude all PD
patients presenting neutralizing antibodies from receiving treatment,
unless another clinical trial was later conducted to establish safety and
effectiveness in this subpopulation). Clearly, obtaining empirical data
to guide our decision was preferred and as we considered how to address this concern and held discussions with numerous immunological
experts, we gained increasing appreciation for the fact that the route of
immunization often signiﬁcantly impacts the response to subsequent
re-exposure to the antigenic stimulus (i.e., AAV). Moreover, the prevailing presumption was that humans were primarily exposed to AAV via
the respiratory system and we soon concluded that no adequate, nor
validated artiﬁcially-immunized models of AAV existed to address this
issue adequately. Thus, we were presented with a bit of a quandary.
We had learned that many nonhuman primates had been exposed to
AAV and many presented neutralizing antibodies to the virus and
this provided us with a reasonable approach to empirically address
this issue.
Testing for the existence of neutralizing antibodies (Ab) revealed
that nearly 50% of the monkeys presented neutralizing Ab to AAV
(Ceregene, unpublished results). Monkeys were distributed among
treatment groups such that a number of monkeys with and without
neutralizing Ab were included in key CERE-120 groups, which
allowed the assessment of the potential impact of the presence of
prior Ab to AAV on the performance of, or tolerance to, administration
of CERE-120. The results of this effort were quite revealing and very
comforting. First, when we compared the titer of neutralizing Ab to
AAV in serum from monkeys prior to and following CERE-120 administration, we found all possible outcomes: (1) no change in Ab titer;
(2) ampliﬁcation of Ab titer in monkeys previously presenting Ab at
baseline; and (3) induction of Ab in monkeys previously negative at
baseline. Interestingly, all these outcomes proved to be an epiphenomenon as far as CERE-120 safety and effectiveness was concerned.
That is, none of these varied AAV Ab outcomes had any impact on any
safety/tox outcome, including inﬂammatory markers at the site of administration in the brain, the transduction and expression of NRTN, or
the bioactivity or ‘efﬁcacy’ in any model system. Thus, these data argued that prior existing antibodies to AAV have no impact on protein
expression or bioactivity following AAV-viral mediated gene transfer
to the brain, at least following a single administration. Importantly,
the clinical data, to date, appear entirely consistent with the predictions made from these nonhuman primate results.
‘Apparent’ lack of NRTN expression and/or bioactivity. As we barely
began our efforts to design and test a novel vector to deliver the
NRTN gene for PD, we quickly ran into a major issue; apparently extremely poor NRTN expression, measured in the conditioned medium
from cells presumably transduced with the NRTN gene 48 h earlier
(Ceregene, unpublished results). We conﬁrmed and expanded these

166

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

A

B

C

E

D

F

Fig. 1. Immunohistochemical photomicrographs showing transgene protein expression in rat striatum following administration of three different vector constructs: panels A (and D): low
and high power magniﬁcation views of robust GDNF expression following injection of vector containing GDNF gene with its natural pre–pro sequence; panels B (and E): low and high
power magniﬁcation views of weak NRTN expression following injection of vector containing NRTN gene with its natural pre–pro sequence (note high power view suggests most protein
remains intracellular); panels C (and F): low and high power magniﬁcation views of NRTN following injection of CERE-120, which express NRTN gene via substitution of human NGF pre–
pro sequence (note substantially more robust immunohistochemical signal, with clear suggestion of ample extracellular protein). See section “Apparent lack of NRTN expression and/or
bioactivity” for more details.

results by injecting the same vector into the striatum of rats, noting
poor NRTN immunohistochemical signal, whereas a similar vector expressing GDNF (as a positive control) produced an intense signal (see
Fig. 1). High-magniﬁcation examination of the NRTN-labeled histology slides revealed somewhat better evidence of NRTN expression, but
it appeared to be only intracellular, with no clear evidence for protein
outside the transduced striatal neurons. To further evaluate the performance of this vector, we tested it in 6-OHDA treated rats, comparing it to a similar vector expressing GDNF, and found no evidence for
neuroprotection, while the GDNF vector provided signiﬁcant neuroprotection (Fig. 2). These data clearly suggested that NRTN was not
being secreted effectively from the transduced cells, and while the absolute level of protein also seemed low (at least as measured by immunoreactivity), we did not know to what extent elevated levels of
NRTN sequestered in the soma might affect expression efﬁciency of
NRTN within those cells. Recognizing that protein expression is regulated via the pre–pro sequence, we began a search for alternative pre–
pro secretion sequences to substitute in the hope that might correct
this problem. We eventually constructed, tested and conﬁrmed the
effectiveness of substituting the human NGF pre–pro for the natural
NRTN pre–pro (Figs. 1 and 2). While we were not certain as to what
extent use of a chimeric gene might create safety issues or pose concerns for the FDA, we elected to move forward with an AAV2 vector
substituting the human NGF pre–pre sequence, followed by the
remaining NRTN genome as our potential neurotrophic factor product
for PD and it thereafter enjoyed the full focus of our development

Loss of vector due to binding to dosing hardware. Early in the program
we also discovered that our highly puriﬁed vector binds to conventional
stainless steel injection needles with high afﬁnity, thus signiﬁcantly altering the concentration of the product delivered to the brain, in a nonlinear fashion (a problem we discovered that does not occur as readily
when less-pure vector preparations are injected because the impurities
block the vector from binding to the stainless steel surface) (Ceregene,
unpublished results). Because we had not anticipated that the “vector
recovery” studies would really identify a problem, and were primarily treating it as a simple box-checking exercise prior to ﬁling our
IND, we had already initiated some of our safety/tox studies by the
time we discovered the issue. Thus, we elected to repeat some of

B

TH Positive Neurons (% Intact Side)

A

efforts. We ﬁrst conﬁrmed that the NRTN protein expressed from
CERE-120 had an amino acid sequence identical to that of endogenous, full length human NRTN. We then addressed possible issues involving the use of a chimeric gene head on by testing extremely high
doses (by any standard or traditional deﬁnition) and long post dosing
safety time points to assure that if any safety problems existed, we
would more likely induce them. If this occurred we would have the
opportunity to evaluate and better understand them and hopefully
establish risk mitigation procedures. In the end, we found no evidence of any safety issue with CERE-120, and it has continued to
prove itself to be the cleanest and safest product I have ever tested
in any program at any time in my career, including many already approved for use in humans (Tables 1 and 3).

NGFpre/pro

VEH Control

NRTN

GDNF

VEH Control

NRTN

GDNF

Fig. 2. Protection of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons against 6-OHDA toxicity with vectors described in Fig. 1. (A) Note that vector containing NRTN gene with its natural pre–pro is
ineffective (vector containing GDNF gene was included as positive control); (B) vector containing NRTN gene but substituting human NGF pre–pro provides comparable protection
to vector containing GDNF gene. See section “Apparent lack of NRTN expression and/or bioactivity” for more details.
Data in panel B were derived from results previously published; Gasmi et al., 2007a).

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

TH

VMAT-2

AAV2NRTN

VEH
Control

Fig. 3. Photomicrographs showing species-speciﬁc, down-regulation of TH immunohistochemical signal following expression of high concentrations of NRTN in rat striatum.
Note that while TH-positive staining is decreased following AAV2-NRTN (compared to
vehicle-treated rats) no loss of VMAT-2 staining is seen, conﬁrming that dopamine
neurons and terminals are intact. Other studies also demonstrated dopamine function
remained intact despite reduction in TH-straining. Also, the phenomenon was shown
to be species speciﬁc and does not occur in primates. See section “Dose related los of
TH immunoreactivity” for further details.

the rat safety/tox studies to determine if we could retain the same,
wide dose-range and therapeutic index we had initially thought we
had established. In addition to causing us to repeat part of our safety/tox program, this discovery also required an intense effort to develop and validate a practical means to inhibit the vector/stainless
steel binding prior to ﬁling the IND and initiating the planned
CERE-120 clinical trials. Following a series of bench experiments
with the vector and dosing hardware, we learned that the binding
was saturable and we therefore elected to develop a method to saturate all of the vector binding sites prior to use immediately before
each surgery. For purposes of ﬁling an IND, this required assurance
and formal validation that this method would indeed work under a
range of conditions possibly encountered in the operating room.
While the method allowed us to responsibly move forward with our
clinical program, we knew this was a temporary solution and we therefore continued working to ﬁnd a more satisfactory solution that eventually could be used during commercialization of CERE-120. In time, we
developed a proprietary non-stainless steel injection needle that was
implemented prior to our Phase 2a study and has since been used for
all our human studies (Gasmi, 2012).
Dose-related ‘loss’ of TH immunoreactivity. Another of the more troublesome observations made while in the midst of analyzing our safety/toxicology (high dose) studies, was a dramatic reduction in TH
expression in the targeted nigrostriatal neurons (Fig. 3). This doserelated effect initially suggested that high expression levels of NRTN
might possibly be neurotoxic (even causing death of many nigrostriatal neurons). Obviously, this provided some cause for concern and we
immediately launched an intensive investigation to better understand the phenomenon and thus assess its impact on the potential

167

viability and continued development of CERE-120 as a therapeutic
agent.
We ﬁrst examined VMAT-2 immunoreactivity and observed no
changes as a function of CERE-120 dose or level of NRTN expression,
despite reduced TH signal (Fig. 3). The preservation of VMAT staining
gave us some level of comfort because this suggested that CERE-120
was not overtly toxic to the nigrostriatal terminals, although the reduced TH signal still could reﬂect impaired function of the targeted
dopamine neurons (Ceregene, unpublished results). We launched a
series of additional studies to provide more insight into the functional
status of the neurons with down-regulated TH. This functional characterization included neurochemical analyses of striatal dopamine and
dopamine metabolites as well as behavioral analysis using motor
tasks that reﬂect nigrostriatal function.
Rats treated with a high dose of CERE-120 (2× 1010 vg/striatum) for
6 months demonstrated the most dramatic reduction in TH and thus we
used this condition to assess possible neurochemical changes in their
nigrostriatal dopamine neurons, by neurochemical analyses of fresh
striatal tissue. Speciﬁcally, the ratios of striatal dopamine and its metabolites, dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) and homovanillic acid
(HVA) were measured using high performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). Changes in the ratios of these metabolites have been shown,
and are generally accepted to reﬂect changes in dopamine activity and
turnover at the synaptic level (e.g., Bartus, et al., 2004). Following a
high dose of CERE-120 (that reduced TH-immunoreactivity), we observed a small but signiﬁcant increase (37%) in the ratio of the dopamine metabolites (HVA and DOPAC) to dopamine levels in the CERE120-treated rats, compared to formulation buffer control rats, reﬂecting
a modest increase in the rate of dopamine turnover and enhanced
dopaminergic activity in CERE-120 treated rats. Additionally, a small,
but statistically signiﬁcant decrease (21%) in absolute levels of dopamine was also observed, which is also consistent with a moderate increase in dopamine turnover. Thus, the neurochemical assessment
supported an increase in dopamine function of the high dose CERE120 rats, and certainly not the decrease in dopamine function that
might have been suggested by the decrease in TH-immunoreactivity
(Ceregene, unpublished results).
Similarly, performance on a number of behaviors that have been
shown to be dependent on an intact nigrostriatal system were examined in rats 6 months after CERE-120 administration to the striatum.
These included adjusted forelimb stepping in response to movement,
vibrissae-elicited forelimb placing, and plank and rod walk tasks. No
differences were observed between CERE-120 treated and formulation buffer control treated rats in any of these behaviors, despite the
reduction in TH-immunoreactivity, thus this again conﬁrmed the
functional integrity of the nigrostriatal system following delivery of
high dose CERE-120 for 6 months (Ceregene, unpublished results).
Importantly, our research in rats not only argued that the TH-downregulation likely has no impact on the function of dopamine neurons,
but further work in nonhuman primates suggested that this most
likely was species-speciﬁc (restricted to rats). That is, several studies
performed in non-human primates clearly demonstrated enhanced intensity of TH staining following CERE-120 administration, both in the
nigra as well as in the terminal ﬁelds of the striatum. This enhanced
TH signal was observed at 3 months to 12 months (i.e., well within
the temporal window of when a decreased signal is seen in rats) and occurred consistently at a 60-fold range of CERE-120 doses. In contrast to
the observations following high-dose CERE-120 in rats, in no case was a
decrease in TH staining ever observed following CERE-120 in nonhuman primates.
Coincidentally, around the time we were completing our studies,
two publications from Bjorklund and Kirik using GDNF (Georgievska
et al., 2004; Rosenblad et al., 2003) provided independent ﬁndings
very similar to ours, with even more compelling evidence that the phenomenon was a transient (fully reversible), compensatory response to
increased dopamine activity following delivery of the neurotrophic

168

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

factor. Thus, these beautifully-conceived studies persuasively argued
that delivery of neurotrophic factors, such as GDNF (and by association,
NRTN), to young healthy rats causes a transient increase in dopamine
activity, requiring a compensatory decrease in TH activity in order to
maintain normal levels of dopamine activity. Thus, they argued that
the loss of TH staining is merely a normal compensatory mechanism
intended to maintain normal dopamine activity in healthy neurons, providing welcome support that the down-regulation we had unexpectedly
observed with our high dose CERE-120 rats was not an issue that likely
posed any risk to PD patients.
Nonetheless, given the importance of this issue, we wanted to
move forward with as much certainty as possible. We reasoned that
since age is an important risk factor for Parkinson's disease, tests in
aged rats might provide important, additional information for whether this phenomenon poses a risk to PD patients. Moreover, we also
imagined that aged rats might provide a unique means to further differentiate the compensatory explanation from the ‘toxicity’ alternative possibility. We surmised that because aged rats suffer a modest
reduction in dopaminergic function spontaneously, one might expect
that the phenomenon would be less robust in aged rats if it was truly
compensatory in response to enhanced NRTN-induced dopamine
function. That is, there should be less need for a compensatory reaction to merely restoring function toward more normal levels, where
the levels are already reduced (as they are with age). On the other
hand, if the decreased TH signal represents a toxic effect to a high
dose NRTN, one might expect to see it exaggerated in aged rats,
where the ability to overcome neurodegenerative perturbations is
generally less evident than in young rats, and the effect of toxic challenges are therefore often more severe. Consistent with the interpretation that it is a compensatory response, the decrease in TH was less
robust in aged rats than in young rats given the same dose (Ceregene,
unpublished results).
Thus, all of the available evidence generated was consistent with
the concept that the decrease in TH observed in the rat following
elevations in either GDNF or NRTN does not reﬂect a toxic liability
but rather a normal, compensatory reaction that maintains normal
levels of dopaminergic synaptic activity in the context of continuous
neurotrophic factor stimulation. Moreover, this phenomenon did
not occur in nonhuman primates and together these two general observations provided the empirical support to move forward with conﬁdence that human subjects would not be exposed to undue risk
following continuous NRTN expression, even at high doses.
Risk of cerebellar toxicity, due to reports by others using GDNF. In the
midst of preparing our initial pre-IND documentation for the FDA
and Appendix M materials for the NIH's DNA Recombinant Advisory
Committee (aka the ‘RAC’), informal reports began to circulate on
toxicity induced in nonhuman primates from a program that roughly
parallels the general goals and objectives of CERE-120. This program
(sponsored by Amgen) used indwelling cannula and a subdermal
pump to infuse GDNF, an analog of NRTN, into the striatum of advanced PD patients. While it therefore differed in signiﬁcant ways
from ours using AAV to express NRTN, the similarities of two
closely-related neurotrophic factors delivered to the same brain
sites for the same indication and purpose could not be ignored. Speciﬁcally, Amgen announced suspension of their program because of
Purkinje cell loss and associated astrocytosis in the cerebellum in several monkeys receiving high-dose infusions with GDNF for 6 months;
many monkeys in this study also showed dose-related antibodies to
GDNF, as did many PD subjects treated in a similar manner. The
data from this study were initially presented in poster form and we
were able to get a copy of it, prior to its eventual publication
(Hovland et al., 2007), both of which offered important details regarding these potentially troubling observations. Because the observations of possible toxicity following chronic infusions of GDNF
might predict similar toxicity with chronic expression of NRTN, we

evaluated the data reported and expended great effort to learn as
much as we could about the phenomenon, including details not included in the poster and publication. It was important to gain a detailed understanding of the toxicity reported with GDNF in order to
assess possible risk in our own program and determine whether continuing to develop CERE-120 was appropriate. In time, with careful
due diligence, we became comfortable that the toxicity reported following infusions of puriﬁed GDNF did not predict that similar effects
should be seen with gene-mediated expression of NRTN.
The authors pointed out that the mechanisms of action for the cerebellar pathology and the development of antibodies were unknown,
although they did conclude that an important factor was likely leakage of the GDNF protein into the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) or blood
from the infusion pump implanted under the skin and/or the cannula
implanted in the striatum. Data supporting that hypothesis include
the fact that a clear, dose-related increase in recombinant GDNF
was seen in the CSF, while a signiﬁcant·number of monkeys in the
high-dose group even had detectable levels of recombinant GDNF in
their plasma. Importantly, we also noted that several other toxicology
ﬁndings were consistent with mistargeted protein delivery to periventricular areas. These included dose-related changes in the classic
signs for mistargeted (in this case, more-likely leaking) trophic factor
in periventricular sites, including weight loss and meningeal thickening in the area of the medulla oblongata and segments of the spinal
cord. Because we recognized from the start of our program that
prior attempts to test NGF in AD patients and GDNF in PD patients
via infusions in the lateral ventricles produced the same troubling side
effects, we were already routinely testing for these possible effects in
our animal studies.
We were therefore able to quickly and easily differentiate our results
with CERE-120, expressing NRTN via gene transfer, from those infusing
puriﬁed GDNF via artiﬁcial hardware. Importantly, the differences were
striking. First, in contrast to the GDNF infusion study, NRTN has never
been detected in serum or CSF, even at excessive doses of CERE-120 or
after a full year of continuous NRTN expression. Secondly, no antibodies
to NRTN have ever been detected with any dose of CERE-120 or time
point. Third, none of the classic signs of non-targeted neurotrophic factor exposure to periventricular sites have ever been seen with CERE120, despite careful, protocol-prescribed attention and formal analyses
speciﬁcally intended to identify possible changes in weight, pain, meningeal thickening or axon sprouting. Finally, no evidence of any histological changes was noted in the cerebellum, or any other brain region
or body system for that matter. The latter ﬁnding is particularly cogent,
for we routinely provide an extensive series of brain tissue from our
safety/toxicology studies to an outside neuropathologist for independent assessment. Coincidentally, the same neuropathologist that examined our CERE-120 tissue participated in the GDNF assessment (and is
an author on the GDNF publication). After becoming aware of the
GDNF-cerebellar ﬁndings, we speciﬁcally asked that he review sections
of the cerebellum for any signs of pathology or histological stress. Despite clear and intimate knowledge of the changes seen with GDNF
and instructions to identify any changes of any kind following CERE120, no toxicological ﬁndings were seen. While it is still not clear
what mechanism(s) might be responsible for the constellation of safety
issues raised by the high-dose GDNF monkeys, we concluded that each
of them could be most parsimoniously linked to problems in protein delivery related to inherent deﬁciencies with the use of indwelling hardware, leading to leakage of the protein into the cerebral spinal ﬂuid
system of the CNS during the chronic infusions and possibly also into
the circulatory system during routine reﬁlling of the pumps. The leakage of GNDF, in turn, caused untargeted and undesirable periventricular
and possibly systemic exposure, inducing the same unwanted neurotrophic response in the periventricular sites previously reported when
neurotrophic factors were intentionally infused into the lateral ventricles (Eriksdotter Jonhagen et al., 1998; Nutt et al., 2003). We felt this
conclusion enjoyed further, independent support because we noted

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

that another laboratory independently reported that infusions of radiolabeled GDNF into the monkey putamen (using a pump/cannula system similar to that used in the Hovland et al. study) produced leakage
of GDNF to superﬁcial layers of the occipital cortex and cerebellum
(Salvatore et al., 2006).
In conclusion, none of the toxicity seen with infusions of GDNF in
monkeys had been, or has been seen following CERE-120 (expression
of NRTN via gene transfer), despite even longer CERE-120 time points
and delivery of the highest doses feasible. While it is possible that GDNF
possesses a much less desirable safety proﬁle than does NRTN, a more
likely explanation for all the data is that the major factor causing the
neurotoxicity observed in the monkeys of Hovland et al. (2007), was
untargeted delivery of the protein due to a necessarily cumbersome
and suboptimal delivery approach. Thus, these data, in conjunction
with those collected in the course of developing and testing CERE-120,
argue for the relative safety and effective delivery of proteins using
gene-transfer, compared to chronic infusions of protein via mechanical
hardware. This same assessment also provided a logical and parsimonious explanation for the development of neutralizing antibodies to
GDNF in several of the human subjects enrolled in Amgen's controlled
Phase 2 trial (Lang et al., 2006) while also providing comfort that this
phenomenon was not likely to be seen with CERE-120. Thus, we proceeded with the development of CERE-120, despite Amgen's abandonment of their program and it has now been many years since their
reports of toxicity in monkeys and humans and we continue to observe no evidence of toxicity or antibodies to NRTN in any animals
or Parkinson's subjects administered CERE-120.
Translational advantages of CERE-120
Despite the sometimes unique and often unexpected challenges
confronted when developing CERE-120 for entry into human testing,
we nonetheless enjoyed a number of major empirical, translational
‘breaks’ or advantages related to the performance of CERE-120. These
greatly facilitated our ability to move the nonclinical program forward
efﬁciently and responsibly into clinical testing in PD subjects. These included the observations: (1) that CERE-120 produces a predictable, controlled, dose-dependent volume of NRTN expression, (2) that NRTN
expression reaches an asymptote approximately 1 month, post-dosing
and exhibits no change in amount, location or pattern of protein expression thereafter (for at least one to two years later), and (3) that CERE120 lacks any detectable toxicity or side effects, even at extremely
high, excessive doses, thus simplifying translation of doses in animals
to those intended for humans (see Bartus et al., 2011a for a detailed
discussion regarding translating doses to humans using inter-species
‘scaling’). If any of CERE-120's characteristics were markedly different,
it is unlikely this program could have been translated to the human clinic as efﬁciently or effectively as it was, let alone become the ﬁrst to establish clinical proof of concept for neurotrophic factors in human
neurodegenerative diseases as well as gene transfer for a CNS indication. The more we studied CERE-120 and understood it, the more we
appreciated how ‘well-behaved’ it performed. Greater detail regarding
these positive attributes is provided in the following sections.
Kinetics and expression patterns of NRTN following CERE-120 injections
The primary objective of delivering CERE-120 is to achieve expression of NRTN throughout the striatum, while at the same time avoiding NRTN exposure to non-targeted sites within the CNS that could
conceivably cause side effects. In particular, we felt it important to
avoid exposing periventricular areas to NRTN since direct infusion
of other neurotrophic factors (e.g., GDNF, NGF) into the ventricles
had been shown to produce adverse effects in animals and humans
(Day-Lollini et al., 1997; Eriksdotter Jonhagen et al., 1998; Kordower
et al., 1999; Nutt et al., 2003). Thus, it was important that we achieve
an understanding for the variables that inﬂuence the volumetric
spread (location) of protein as well as the amount, so that this insight
might later be applied for dose-selection in humans. It was also

169

important to understand the kinetics of expression following CERE120 administration in order to rationally design efﬁcacy experiments,
and to know when maximum expression is achieved in order to interpret longer-term safety date for CERE-120.
A series of studies was conducted to examine the time course of
NRTN expression following CERE-120 administration and the relationship between CERE-120 dose, NRTN volume of distribution (via immunohistochemistry) and levels of NRTN (via ELISA). Collectively, these
studies established that: (1) NRTN expression is detectable as early
as 1–2 days after administration of CERE-120 (Gasmi et al., 2007b);
(2) NRTN volume of expression and levels of expression reached an asymptote at approximately 1 month after CERE-120 dosing (Gasmi et al.,
2007b); (3) volume of NRTN expression remains stable throughout the
life-span of the rat and for at least a full year in monkeys (Herzog et al.,
2009, 2011); (4) the volume of distribution of NRTN can be controlled
by manipulating the dose of CERE-120 in both rats (Gasmi et al.,
2007b) and monkeys (Herzog et al., 2008, 2009); and (5) by distributing several injections of CERE-120 within the putamen at predetermined dose levels, it is possible to express NRTN throughout a
signiﬁcant portion of the putamen, while avoiding exposure to other
(non-targeted) brain regions (Gasmi et al., 2007a, 2007b; Herzog et
al., 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011). (The latter point was later extended to
the substantia nigra (Bartus et al., 2011a).).
In summary, the ‘kinetics of expression’ of NRTN following CERE-120
administration into the striatum reveals stable and well-controlled protein largely restricted to the targeted region. These data formed the
basis of dose selection for nonclinical and clinical studies and the initial
foundation for the CERE-120 development program.
Bioactivity and efﬁcacy of NRTN following CERE-120 administration
Recognizing that no animal model can truly capitulate all the
important elements of any human neurodegenerative disease (for
discussion of these issues, see reviews by Bartus, 1988; Bartus et al.,
1983), we elected to test CERE-120 in multiple animal models
(Table 6). The presumption made was that because PD is a complex
disease that most likely involves many different etiologic and pathogenic variables that ultimately lead to degeneration and death of the
nigrostriatal dopamine neurons, no animal model can reliably predict
efﬁcacy for restoring function of these neurons. Thus, if one could
demonstrate that CERE-120 mediated NRTN expression can overcome a wide variety of neural perturbations to these neurons in animals, then it may more likely help rescue function and status of
these same neurons in PD patient's degeneration, no matter what factors are responsible for their degeneration.
A series of experiments in rats and monkeys was conducted to
establish that the NRTN protein expressed following CERE-120 administration is capable of producing a neurotrophic response to nigral
dopamine neurons and that this translates to positive outcomes using
a variety of measurements in a number of different animal models
of PD and dopamine deﬁciency. Studies in young, naive monkeys established that CERE-120, delivered to the striatum, produces sustained
protein expression in striatum and nigra, in a controlled, dose-related
fashion, leading to an appropriate biological trophic signaling in the
nigra (e.g., enhanced tyrosine hydroxylase [TH] and activation of
pERK) (Herzog et al., 2008, 2009). Studies in aged rats and monkeys,
demonstrated similarly appropriate responses to CERE-120, including
hypertrophy of dopamine neurons in aged rats (Herzog et al., 2011),
and increased numbers of TH-positive neurons, enhanced pERK and
F-Dopa PET signaling in aged monkeys, up to 8 months post-dosing
(Herzog et al., 2007). In young rats treated with CERE-120 and then
allowed to grow old (i.e., 20 months later), NRTN expression did not
change and remained biologically active for 18 to 20 months, post
dosing, as indicated by elevated pERK immunoreactivity in nigral
neurons (Herzog et al., 2011). In the 6-OHDA rat model of PD (or nigral
dopamine depletion), CERE-120 was able to protect nigral neurons in a
dose-related fashion, up to 7 months after administration (maximum

170

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Table 6
Variety of preclinical models and end points demonstrating neurotrophic activity with CERE-120.
Model

NRTN expression

Impact on targeted DA neurons

Functional impact

6-OHDA rats

Dose-related and long-term (8 months +)

Increased cell survival

Behavioral beneﬁt (rotation)

Aging rats

Very long-term (20 months +)

Enhanced pERK

nd

Aged rats

Predictable volume of expression conﬁrmed

Classic neurotrophic factor-induced DA cell hypertrophy;
increased pERK signal

nd

Young monkeys

Dose-related expression, persisting for 12 months+

Activated pERK; DA cell hypertrophy

nd

Aged monkeys

Predictable volume and duration of expression
conﬁrmed (8 months +)

Enhance TH in striatum and nigra; Increased # TH + neurons;
DA cell hypertrophy

Enhanced striatal F-dopa PET signal

MPTP monkeys

Predictable volume and duration of expression
conﬁrmed (10 months +)

Preservation/protection neurons; enhanced TH in striatum and
nigra; enhanced pERK in nigra

Improvement in battery of motor tasks

nd = not determined.

time point examined). This neuroprotective effect was linked to functional improvement on the amphetamine-induced rotational task
(Gasmi et al., 2007a). Finally, in the MPTP nonhuman primate model,
CERE-120 produced long-lasting improvement in motor behavior beginning within 1 to 3 months after CERE-120 dosing and persisting for 10+
months, the longest time point examined. CERE-120 also provided protection against nigral neuron degeneration and loss of striatal DA ﬁbers,
as well as enhanced TH and pERK in the preserved nigral neurons of
these same monkeys (Kordower et al., 2006).
Together, these data demonstrated a consistent pattern of bioactivity and efﬁcacy following CERE-120 administration, establishing
that the NRTN protein expressed is robustly and consistently bioactive and can therefore protect and/or restore dopamine neurons and
function in each of the model systems tested (Table 6).
Safety of CERE-120
Perhaps the most important component of the nonclinical development program for CERE-120 involved tests of safety and potential
toxicity. Constructing and executing an unusually thorough and conservative nonclinical safety program prior to moving into human testing seemed appropriate for several related reasons. First, the history
of efforts to translate the promise of gene therapy into clinical trials
has been fraught with many unanticipated and sometimes serious
side effects. Secondly, intervention in the human brain necessarily
raises even greater concerns when considering the possible side effects
that might occur with a novel experimental intervention. Finally, CERE120 was expected to produce relatively permanent (i.e., irreversible)
NRTN expression, necessitating that the burden of proof for safety be
set higher than normal to establish that no harm could reasonably be
expected from administration of CERE-120 or long-term expression of
NRTN.
For these reasons, the nonclinical toxicology/safety program for
CERE-120 tested large numbers of rats and monkeys, at doses hundreds
of times higher than those required for bioactivity and efﬁcacy in the
animal models. In order to better prepare for the possibility that serious
side effects might occur from entirely unanticipated sources or in unexpected ways, the toxicology evaluations were not limited to the CNS,
but rather included tissues throughout the body and the entire brain,
using multiple endpoints. In total, the safety/toxicity program, alone,
consisted of six studies in rats and four more in monkeys, including
tests on aged rats and aged monkeys (since age is a major risk factor
in PD). Collectively, these studies established a wide safety margin for
CERE-120. In fact, no CERE-120-related toxicity was observed at any
dose or time point in any study conducted. Therefore, no ‘maximum
tolerated dose’ could be identiﬁed (since even the highest, excessive
doses were well-tolerated), including the highest dose that could be
practically administered. (Note: vectors will aggregate and fall out of

solution at extreme concentrations, and injury to brain tissue will
occur if excessive volumes are infused; these factors necessarily limit
the highest dose that can be administered to an animal).
In summary, these studies evaluating the safety and toxicity of
CERE-120 up to one year in rats and monkeys demonstrated: (1) no
adverse effects on general health, diet, etc.; (2) no adverse effects
on neurological or behavioral assessments; (3) no histopathology
on cerebrum, cerebellum, brain stem, or spinal cord; (4) none of
the toxicological changes seen with intraventricular infusion of NGF
or GDNF in animals and humans, including weight loss, pain,
Schwann cell hyperplasia or axon sprouting; (5) no functional or
morphological adverse effects on the nigrostriatal system, nor any
CERE-120 related inﬂammatory reactions; (6) no signiﬁcant changes
in clinical chemistry or hematology; (7) no histopathological effects
on peripheral organs; (8) no detectable NRTN in CSF or serum; and
(9) no detectable serum antibodies to NRTN. In conclusion, extensive
testing in nearly 250 rats and over 30 monkeys, involving doses far in
excess of those intended for the clinic, up to a year following CERE120 administration revealed not a single toxicological ﬁnding or safety concern, thus providing further support for advancing this program
into clinical testing in humans.

Synopsis: preclinical proof of concept support for CERE-120
In summary, 20 nonclinical studies were conducted with CERE-120 to
establish both safety and proof of concept in animal models to support
the initial Phase 1 clinical trial in PD patients (Table 5). These studies
consistently demonstrate that: (a) a single stereotactic administration
of CERE-120 provides NRTN selectively to the targeted areas in the
brain, (b) the amount and volume of NRTN expression follow an orderly
dose–response relationship, (c) expression levels and rate of expression
are predictable, and (d) the volume of brain tissue and region exposed
remains stable for many years, once an asymptote is reached at approximately one month. Additionally, NRTN-expressed via CERE-120 is
potently bioactive, inducing the conventional surrogate markers established for neurotrophic activity and enhanced dopamine neuronal function, including cellular hypertrophy, pERK activation and enhanced
tyrosine hydroxylase expression. CERE-120 is also able to restore target
innervation and protect nigrostriatal neurons against degeneration in
multiple animal models. Finally, CERE-120 has generated no evidence
of toxicity or any side effects, even at dose-multiples hundreds of times
higher than required for bioactivity and efﬁcacy in animal models of
nigrostriatal neurodegeneration. In sum, the nonclinical program
established that CERE-120 is able to produce the desired trophic response in targeted neurons in a safe and effective fashion, therefore
supporting the advancement of the program into human testing in PD
patients.

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Identifying appropriate CERE-120 doses for testing in humans
As the nonclinical program continued to generate safety and efﬁcacy
data that supported testing CERE-120 in human Parkinson's patients, it
became increasingly important to consider how we might select safe
and potentially effective doses to be tested in humans. The issues
confronted with a ‘ﬁrst in human’ gene therapy vector targeted to a relatively small area of the brain were necessarily far different from those
confronted when selecting initial human doses for typical
pharmaceuticals, especially systemically-delivered small molecules or
biopharmaceuticals. At least three separate and relatively unique translational obstacles complicated this activity. First, contrary to nearly all
other ‘ﬁrst in human’ tests of novel products, use of gene transfer does
not allow the opportunity to withdraw the biopharmaceutical agent
once delivered, for the vector will likely continue to express the transgene protein for the life of the transduced cells. Secondly, since the
NRTN is speciﬁcally expressed in targeted sites within the human
brain, it is not possible to monitor dose levels via plasma pharmacokinetic methods, as is commonly done following systemic administration
of novel agents; indeed, no surrogate is even available to conﬁrm successful NRTN expression or the distribution of vector when injected
into the human brain. Thus, other than the lack of observable safety
issues, no hard data is generated to help guide ‘dose escalation’ in
human testing (such as drug levels in plasma or tissue, as is often used
for more typical drugs under development). Finally, because administration of CERE-120 requires an invasive procedure (i.e., stereotactic
brain surgery), ethical issues (and regulatory guidance) dictate that
one cannot initially test intentionally very low(i.e. virtually safe) doses
and then gradually increase the dose to approach presumed therapeutically relevant levels, as is often done for small molecules. Rather, the
risk of surgery to the subject requires that all doses administered have
at least a rational chance of providing meaningful efﬁcacy. These circumstances collectively required that the starting “ﬁrst-in-human”
doses be sufﬁciently low to likely be safe and also sufﬁciently high to
rationally be efﬁcacious. Fortunately, the nonclinical data were extensive, including the wide safety margins established for CERE-120 and
the kinetics of expression established in rats and monkeys (see prior
sections). All these data proved to be immensely helpful in addressing
this problem.
First, extensive nonclinical testing demonstrated that the dose–response function for CERE-120 was very different from that of conventional small molecules. With the latter, as the dose is gradually increased, one
moves from a ‘no effect level’ through a range of doses until reaching one
that provides the desired therapeutic effect. Eventually, even higher doses
produce undesirable toxicity (thus deﬁning a maximum tolerated dose).
In contrast to this conventional scenario, with CERE-120, an extremely
wide range of doses was shown to provide the desired neurotrophic

171

effect, with no dose level showing any sign of toxicity. As long as the
level of NRTN expression was sufﬁcient to be detected via standard immunohistochemical methods, we consistently observed clear signs of
the desired neurotrophic activity. Thus, a very wide range of doses was
seen to produce roughly equivalent neurotrophic effects at the cellular
level with no dose showing any sign of cellular stress, or toxicity. Secondly, tests in rats and monkeys established that we could predict and control
the volume (and amount) of protein expressed by varying the vector
genome dose of CERE-120.
These data collectively argued that we did not need to concern ourselves with the conventional pharmaceutical concepts of a maximum
tolerated dose or human ‘therapeutic index’ for CERE-120, when selecting the doses to be tested in humans. Rather, with CERE-120 it was
more important to focus on identifying doses that would adequately
cover the putamen (i.e., with enough protein to be detected by immunohistochemistry — which we established produced the desired neurotrophic response), while avoiding NRTN expression outside the borders
of the putamen (which we considered the primary source of potential
toxicity, since prior studies infusing neurotrophic factors in both
humans and primates reported that serious side effects could be induced if high concentrations of the protein were exposed to periventricular tissue).
Using the extensive dose–response data we accumulated in animal studies establishing how volume of NRTN expression changed
as a function of CERE-120 dose, and considering differences in the
volume of targeted brain structures (both putamen and later substantia nigra), we sought to select human doses that were equivalent to
those found to be both effective and safe in our animal studies.
When deﬁning the initial human doses, we applied three 3 simple
principles: (1) the more broadly the targeted site is covered with
elevated NRTN, the better (i.e., cover as many of the degenerating terminals as possible); (2) it was not necessary to worry about NRTN
levels being elevated too high in any part of the targeted putamen,
but (3) NRTN spreading outside the targeted putamen should be
avoided, with particular attention to the possibility of protein (or
vector) following paths of least resistance (e.g., large cerebral vessels
and white matter tracts) and thus exceeding the intended targets. Of
course, given that we had not yet collected any evidence that vector
spread and protein expression in human brain would necessarily
precisely follow that established for monkeys (i.e., it could spread
further), we selected two reasonably conservative doses for our initial
Phase 1 trial, estimated (based on animal expression data) to likely
cover between 25 and 40% of the putamen. Later quantiﬁcation of
NRTN expression from CERE-120-treated human autopsy cases conservatively estimated putaminal coverage to be ~ 15% (Bartus et al.,
2011b); currently, it is not known whether AAV and/or NRTN diffuse
less widely in human PD brain (compared to nonhuman primate

Table 7
Cross-species dose equivalents (based on relative volume of targeted brain sites), enabling rational, species-to-species dose comparisons.
Species

Vol. of target
(mm3)

Efﬁcacy considerations
Dose/hemisphere
(vg × 109)

Dose equiv.
(vg × 109/mm3)

Dose/hemisphere
(vg × 109)

Dose equiv.
(vg × 109/mm3)

Safety considerations

Striatum/putamen

Rat (striatum)
Monkey (striatum)
Human Ph 1: ﬁrst in humans (Putamen)
Human Ph 2a (Putamen)
Human Revised Ph 1/2b (Putamen)

25
1200
4000
4000
4000

0.16–4.0
150
65–270
270
1000

0.006–0.16
0.13
0.016–0.07
0.07
0.25

20
1800
270
270
1000

0.8
1.5
0.07
0.07
0.25

Substantia nigra

Rat
Monkey Projected
Human Ph 1: ﬁrst in humans
Human Ph 2a
Human revised Ph 1/2b

2.5–3.0
50–60
n/a
n/a
300–500

1.6
32
n/a
n/a
200

0.6
0.6
n/a
n/a
0.5

60
n/a
n/a
n/a
200

22.2
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.5

Note: for all rat SN dosing calculations, a volume of 2.7 mm3 was used; for monkey SN calculations, a volume of 55 mm3 was used; and for SN human calculations, a volume of
400 mm3 was used. Also, n/a = not applicable (for substantia nigra not targeted in initial Ph1 and Phase 2a studies).

172

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

brain) or alternatively whether the relatively poor conditions and
processing of human post-mortem autopsy tissue produced a signiﬁcant under estimation of the actual NRTN volume of expression
achieved. This is discussed in some detail in Bartus et al. (2011a).
We used the relative volumes of the targeted putamen (for humans)
or striatum (for animals) to compute comparable, species-speciﬁc “dose
equivalents” (Table 7). This allowed us to use the efﬁcacy and safety
data collected in animals to project ‘human equivalent doses’ (scaled on
the basis of relative volume of the targeted putamen) and to identify comparable doses for humans that provided signiﬁcant neurotrophic effects in
animal models, while also being well within the range of doses shown to
be safe and void of any toxicity in animals. Using this approach, the highest Phase 1 human dose (0.07 vg×109/mm3) was approximately 11.5 to
21.5 times lower than dose equivalents shown to be safe in rats
0.8 vg×109/mm3) and monkeys (1.5 vg×109/mm3), respectively; see
Table 7. At the same time, both Phase 1 doses were well within the
dose range shown to be efﬁcacious in 6-OHDA rats (0.006 to
0.016 vg×109/mm3), while the higher of the two Phase 2 doses
approached the single dose tested and shown to be effective in MPTP
monkeys (i.e., it was 54% of the 0.13 vg×109/mm3 MPTP monkey dose,
by volume of target). However, as discussed below, with the accumulated,
long-term safety data generated in monkeys since the initiation of the
CERE-120 clinical program, and the additional safety data generated in
the initial Phase 1 and Phase 2a clinical trials, we have since further increased the CERE-120 dose to the putamen so that in the current Phase
2b trial, the human dose is nearly twice the comparable MPTP dose and
64% greater than the highest 6-OHDA comparable dose.

Initial clinical experience with CERE-120: establishing clinical proof of
concept for neurotrophic factors
Initial Phase 1
On the basis of a successful nonclinical program, a ‘ﬁrst-inhumans’ Phase 1 safety trial (CERE-120-01) in moderately-advanced
Parkinson's disease patients was initiated in 2005 and completed in
2006. Two dose levels of CERE-120 were tested (6 subjects each),
delivered bilaterally into the terminal ﬁelds of the degenerating
nigrostriatal neurons in the putamen. This study provided initial evidence for the human safety of CERE-120, for no SAEs (serious adverse
events) were noted during the entire duration of the trial. Additionally, preliminary data suggested possible clinical improvement at
12 months, post-dosing with this small population of PD subjects,
showing statistically signiﬁcant improvement (compared to their
pre-CERE-120 baseline scores) on a number of clinically relevant
motor and quality of life endpoints (Marks et al., 2008).
Recognizing the preliminary nature of these open-label data, we
moved quickly to initiate a multi-center, sham surgery-controlled,
double blind Phase 2 trial.

Controlled Phase 2a trial
Introduction. Ceregene initiated a multicenter, sham-surgery-controlled,
double-blinded Phase 2a trial (CERE-120-02) in 2006, intended to
further evaluate safety, while also testing for efﬁcacy in advanced
Parkinson's disease. This trial, completed in 2008, had three primary
goals: (1) generate additional data supporting the safety and feasibility
of this therapeutic approach in patients with Parkinson's disease by
expanding to multiple sites across the United States; (2) generate data
under double-blinded, controlled conditions that would provide initial
“proof of concept” evidence for this approach in human disease and;
(3) achieve a sufﬁciently robust beneﬁt in a single, predetermined “primary endpoint” to support product registration with the FDA and international regulatory agencies. The proof of concept data in particular
should include improvement in a number of relevant, predetermined
motor and health-related quality-of-life assessments, and ideally would
eventually be complemented by histological data (through examination
of the brains from trial patients who might someday come to autopsy).
When the opportunity for histological analyses occurs, the data should
demonstrate that CERE-120 produces predictable and controlled NRTN
expression in the targeted region of the Parkinson's brain (putamen)
and that the expressed NRTN can enhance the status of the degenerating
dopaminergic neurons (e.g., increased TH expression).
For purposes of achieving proof of concept, these additional measures were essential, for it is only through an assessment of several
objective, relevant and mutually-corroborating measures (including
the primary endpoint) that one might ascertain whether CERE-120
is able to exert a clinical beneﬁt on PD and thus establish proof of concept. For registration purposes, these multiple measures were of potential importance to better characterize and conﬁrm beneﬁts across
multiple clinical domains and for negotiating the language of the
label with the FDA, in the event that a statistically signiﬁcant effect
on the primary endpoint was achieved. Most important for purposes of generating registration data for the FDA, however, was the primary endpoint. This was the motor component (part 3) of the Uniﬁed
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) in the practically-deﬁned
motor off state (i.e., no Parkinsonians medications for at least 12 h),
measured at 12 months, post treatment. The protocol was also designed
to generate blinded data on a subset of patients (based on the sequential timing of enrollment) at 15 to 18 months post-surgery and the results of these longer-term effects were presented as part of the
secondary analysis, particularly for “proof of concept” purposes.
Results from controlled Phase 2a trial demonstrate ‘clinical proof of concept’
for therapeutic beneﬁt of CERE-120. The initial multi-center, double-blind,
sham-surgery controlled trial with CERE-120 produced several important ﬁndings. First, additional data supporting the safety of the dosing
procedure and treatment approach were clearly achieved, with no
unexpected serious toxicity or side effect observed. Importantly,

Table 8
“Motor-related” and “Quality of Life” (QOL) endpoints measured in double-blind, controlled Phase 2 trial. Several measures suggested beneﬁt of CERE-120 at 12 months and even
more motor and QOL measures showed beneﬁt at 18 months (* designates statistical signiﬁcance; (*) designates strong trend, bolded). No measure suggested similar beneﬁt of sham.
Data adapted from Marks et al., 2010.
12 month blinded evaluation

UPDRS I “off”
UPDRS II “off”
UPDRS II “on”
UPDRS III “off”
PD diary “off”
PD diary “on without troubling dyskinesia”
Timed walking “off”
PDQ-39

15–18 month blinded evaluation

Sham surgery: change
from baseline

CERE-120: change
from baseline

p Value at
12 months

0.95
− 2.25
1.6
− 6.95
− 0.23 h
0.80 h
− 3.00 s
1.20

− 0.32
− 3.35
− 0.89
− 7.19
− 1.00 h
1.00 h
− 2.65 s
− 2.83

b0.01 *
0.4
0.03 *
0.9
0.07 (*)
0.3
0.6
0.03 *

Sham surgery: Δ
from baseline
1.27
0.82
− 5.64
− 0.52 h
0.55 h
− 0.55 s

CERE-120: Δ
from baseline

p Value at
18 months

− 0.26
− 3.32
Not tested
− 11.21
− 1.48 h
2.25 h
− 8.11 s
Not tested

0.02 *
0.07 (*)
0.02 *
0.09 (*)
0.05 *
0.02 *

Improvement

UPDRS Motor "off" (Change from
Baseline +/- SEM)

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10

Sham Surgery

p=0.023*

CERE-120

-12
-14

target clinical response

-16
Baseline Month 3 Month 6 Month 9 Month 12 Month 15 Month 18

Fig. 4. Changes in UPDRS motor-off scores over time, providing ‘Proof of Concept’ evidence from well controlled trial that CERE-120 is able to improve the function of advanced
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. Note that while this ‘primary endpoint’ did not demonstrate a clinical beneﬁt from CERE-120 at 12 months, a protocol-prescribed analysis of
longer-term, blinded data showed signiﬁcant beneﬁt by 18 months. These data corroborate the beneﬁt of CERE-120 which is also seen in several secondary endpoints at
12 months, and the improvement of even more measurements at 18 months, with no
measure similarly favoring the sham group (see Table 9).
Data adapted from Marks et al., 2010).

intriguing evidence of a clinical beneﬁt from CERE-120 was obtained
when the effects of CERE-120 versus sham treatment were compared
using blinded data from motor and quality of life assessments. At the
12 month protocol-speciﬁed evaluation period, several endpoints provided evidence for CERE-120 beneﬁt, including ﬁndings in wellvalidated PD scales such as the PDQ-39 quality-of-life scale and patients' self-rated motor diaries, without a single measure favoring the
sham-surgery group (Table 8). However, the primary endpoint designated for registration purposes (i.e., UPDRS motor-off part 3) did not
discern a difference between improvements observed in the CERE120 and sham at the 12 month evaluation time point (though both
groups did show equivalent improvement compared to their pretreatment baseline scores; p b 0.05).
Providing further ‘proof of concept’ support for the potential beneﬁt of CERE-120, analyses of data prescribed in the formal Statistical
Analysis Plan and performed on the subset of patients who remained
blinded beyond 12 months, demonstrated an increasing clinical beneﬁt of CERE-120, with several additional secondary measures showing
statistical signiﬁcance, including the protocol-speciﬁed primary efﬁcacy
measure (UPDRS motor-off) when assessed at 18 months, post-dosing

173

(pb 0.023) (Marks et al., 2010). Once again, no measure favored the
sham-surgery group (see Table 8 and Fig. 4).
In an editorial accompanying the publication, Benabid (2010) independently supported the conclusion that the data established
proof of concept, stating that the ﬁndings “provide the ﬁrst clinical
evidence of a clinical beneﬁt of gene therapy in Parkinson's disease;
these results will serve as a starting reference that it is hoped will
be exceeded in future trials”. While this independent endorsement
was welcomed, it was also tempered in the minds of us developing
CERE-120 by the appreciation that the effects achieved, while clearly
promising, were likely not yet sufﬁcient to enable successful translation to widespread clinical practice. Many of us felt that the results
needed to be optimized and fortunately, observations from postmortem tissue of CERE-120-treated subjects provided essential insight to help direct that effort.

Further ‘proof of concept’ support from autopsy tissue. Analyses of postmortem brains from two subjects treated with AAV2-NRTN who died
of causes unrelated to CERE-120 administrated 6 weeks and 3 months
earlier provided further proof of concept evidence in PD, as well as
unique insight for optimizing dosing of CERE-120 in advanced PD
patients (Bartus et al., 2011b). Those data were recently replicated and
extended with autopsy tissue from two more patients treated with
CERE-120 four-plus years prior to dying of unrelated causes (Ceregene,
unpublished data).
Several new and insightful ﬁndings from the autopsy tissue were
reported by Bartus et al. (2011b). First, NRTN expression in the targeted
PD putamen following CERE-120 delivery was conﬁrmed, demonstrating CERE-120 performed as it was designed to do (Fig. 5). Secondly, a
clear but modest increase in TH signal (a commonly accepted surrogate
for improved integrity of DA neurons) was observed in the PD putamen
and linked to targeted NRTN expression, offering the ﬁrst evidence that
enhanced status of dopamine neurons can be achieved in the advanced
PD brain (using the accepted surrogate of TH immunohistochemistry;
Fig. 5). These data provided further proof of concept support for CERE120, establishing that CERE-120 can provide targeted expression of
NRTN in the human brain and that the NRTN expressed via CERE-120
can then enhance the status of degenerating dopamine terminals. Reinforcing these observations, an independent guest editorial (Lewis and
Standaert, 2011) stated that the results of this study provided “proof
that gene therapy with AAV2-NRTN (aka CERE-120) results in functional transgene expression in target cells in humans”.

Fig. 5. Examples of neurturin expression (NRTN; left panel) and tyrosine hydroxylase induction (TH; right panel) in the Parkinson's putamen following CERE-120 administration.
Similar data exists for patients treated 1 month to 4 years post-dosing, and following death from unrelated causes. These data provided the ﬁrst evidence that vector-mediated gene
transfer can be used to express a neurotrophic factor in human brain (left panel) and this, in turn, enhances degenerating nigrostriatal neurons (right panel). However, the response
observed was relatively weak and inconsistent compared to that achieved in animal models. This is most likely due to relatively small levels of NRTN achieved in the soma of degenerating neurons following expression in the terminal ﬁelds, adding further support for the idea that a serious deﬁciency in axonal transport exists in PD and other chronic neurodegenerative
diseases, thus blunting the biological response to the NRTN expressed only in putamen.
Data adapted from Bartus et al., 2011.

174

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

At the same time, despite the NRTN expression in the targeted putamen, evidence for NRTN accumulation was sparse in the substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNc — where the degenerating cell bodies originate).
This observation was unexpected, based on dogma supported by decades of independent research with neurotrophic factors and animal
models around the globe, as well as many, more recent studies directly
with CERE-120; (see Bartus, et al., 2011b). The fact that NRTN expression in the targeted terminal ﬁelds (in the putamen) is not mirrored
by corresponding NRTN in the neuronal cell bodies (in the substantia
nigra) reveals a fundamental difference in the function of degenerating
nigrostriatal neurons in advanced PD, versus conventional animal
models. This difference suggests a serious deﬁciency in retrograde
axonal transport in advanced PD. The hypothesis that NRTN and/or
CERE-120 is not adequately transported from the dopamine terminals
to the cell bodies is consistent with an emerging literature that long
axons die back and suffer deﬁciencies in axonal transport as an early
pathogenic event in a number of neurodegenerative diseases, including
PD (Braak et al., 1999; De Vos et al., 2008; Morﬁni et al., 2009; Raff et al.,
2002; Roy et al., 2005) (for a more detailed discussion, see Bartus et al.,
2011b).
Based on these observations, we concluded that to gain the maximum beneﬁt of CERE-120 in advanced PD, delivery will have to be expanded to include targeting the degenerating cell bodies, as well as the
terminal ﬁeld. We further expect that this will prove true for any other
neurotrophic factor or vector expressing a neurotrophic factor intended
to restore neuronal function and status in most human neurodegenerative diseases. Consistent with the general idea of impaired transport of
NRTN to the cell bodies, though we observed induction of tyrosine
hydroxylase in the terminal ﬁelds of the putamen of the PD autopsy
cases, it was far less extensive and reliable than that observed in prior
primate studies with CERE-120 following equivalent NRTN expression
in the putamen (Bartus et al., 2011b). Moreover, no clear evidence for
enhanced TH was seen in the nigra cell bodies of the PD autopsy cases,
arguing that higher levels of NRTN are required in the substantia nigra
cell bodies to achieve the desired and expected neurotrophic responses,
and the low levels achieved were likely insufﬁcient to produce a satisfactory clinical response. Thus, further dose-optimization, speciﬁcally involving direct targeting of nigra cell bodies with CERE-120 is required
and was implemented as part of a new Phase 1/2b protocol.
Performing due diligence on the concept of targeting the substantia nigra
with CERE-120 to enhance the bioactivity on NRTN in PD subjects
Prior to implementing the novel dosing paradigm of targeting the
substantia nigra in patients, we initiated a ‘risk:beneﬁt assessment’ to
help identify and evaluate potential risks, relative to expected beneﬁt
to patients. Three general areas of potential risk were evaluated:
(1) stereotactic surgery; (2) exposure of SN neurons (and their afferents and efferents) to NRTN; and (3) exposure of neurons far outside
the SN due to mistargeted NRTN. This analysis was performed by senior medical and scientiﬁc staff at Ceregene, in close collaboration
with a number of key opinion leaders and consultants, involving
several neurosurgeons, noted neurologists, several neuroscientists
and psychiatrists familiar with mid-brain dopamine function as well
as Ceregene's SAB. The overwhelming consensus was that the plan
to target the substantia nigra was logical and scientiﬁcally justiﬁed,
that any of the risks identiﬁed were merely hypothetical, had a low
probability of occurring and could likely be mitigated if they did
occur. Thus, an overwhelming, near-unanimous consensus existed
that the potential beneﬁts far outweighed any hypothetical risks.
This position was later also widely endorsed by the Parkinson's disease neurology and neurosurgical community, as evidenced by the
number and quality of excellent sites that enthusiastically agreed to
participate in the clinical trials. Additionally, a competitive LEAPS
(Linked Efforts to Accelerate Parkinson's Solutions) award was granted
by the MJFF (Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research) to help

defray some of the costs of an eventual Phase 2b trial, providing further
independent support for the approach and proposed strategy.
Additional nonclinical studies prior to new dosing approach
Prior to implementing this novel dosing paradigm in humans, we
conducted eight additional nonclinical experiments to evaluate the
feasibility, safety and effectiveness of targeting the substantia nigra
(SN) with AAV2-NRTN (Bartus et al., 2011a) and to better understand
and appraise recent warnings of serious weight loss that might occur
with targeting the SN with neurotrophic factors (Manfredsson et al.,
2009a, 2009b; Su et al., 2009). Finally, we also sought to deﬁne an
appropriate dose of AAV2-NRTN that should safely and effectively
cover the SN in PD patients.
As an initial experiment, we determined SN-volume for rats, monkeys
and humans. We then employed these values to calculate comparable
dose-equivalents for each species by scaling each dose, based on relative
SN volume. Using this information, we then injected AAV2-GFP to monkey SN to quantify AAV2-vector distribution and conﬁrm our calculations
that it provided reasonable SN coverage. Building on these data, we then
selected a ~200-fold-range of AAV2-NRTN doses (and a single AAV2GDNF dose) and administered them to rat SN. This produced an intentionally wide range of protein expression to evaluate the consequence of
NRTN protein in, around and distant from the targeted SN.
In contrast to recent warnings regarding nigra targeting of neurotrophic factors (Manfredsson et al., 2009a, 2009b; Su et al., 2009), no
dose produced any serious side effects or toxicity, though we replicated
the modest reduction-in-weight-gain reported by others with AAVGDNF, via our highest AAV2-NRTN and the AAV2-GDNF dose, only. A
dose-related increase in NRTN expression was seen, with the lower
doses limiting NRTN to the peri-SN and the highest dose producing
mistargeted-NRTN well-outside the SN. Using differences in location
of NRTN expression throughout the midbrain and diencephalon across
the range of doses, and correlating with either the presence or absence
of changes in weight, we were able to demonstrate that the reductionin-weight-gain following excessive-doses can clearly be dissociated
from NRTN in the targeted SN, and is linked to mistargeted NRTN in
the diencephalon. Moreover, we further demonstrated that prior destruction of the dopaminergic SN neurons via 6-OHDA had no impact
on the weight loss phenomenon, further dissociating neurotrophic exposure to SN dopamine neurons as the culprit for weight changes. We
also showed that more than 50% of the effect on weight can be easily
mitigated with simple dietary supplementation of preferred foods to
rats, providing further conﬁdence that the low risk of an effect on
weight in PD patients could likely be mitigated with appropriate instructions and dietary intervention. Finally, we demonstrated that relatively low AAV2-NRTN doses provided signiﬁcant neuroprotection
against 6-OHDA toxicity (compared to the very high doses that had
no toxicity), establishing a wide therapeutic-index for nigral targeting
of CERE-120.
Thus, despite the warnings that serious safety issues were likely to
occur if the SN is targeted with GFLs, and the intense controversy that
followed, a careful empirical evaluation of the concept established
that the concerns are largely unfounded for: (1) massive doses would
be required, far in excess of anything that one might imagine giving to
humans, once properly scaled doses are calculated and considered;
(2) even with signiﬁcant mistargeted protein in mid-brain, not a single
side effect of any type could be detected, unless the mistargeted protein
spreads to the distant diencephalon; and (3) even with massive doses
leading to wildly mistargeted protein in diencephalon, the only side effect observed was modest reduction in food intake, which correlated
with similarly modest reduction in weight, both of which could be
largely mitigated by dietary supplementation of preferred foods.
Collectively, these data provided direct empirical support for the
idea of targeting the SN with AAV2-NRTN in PD patients, demonstrating
that properly targeted and scaled AAV2-NRTN provides safe and effective NRTN expressions. They also provided the means to deﬁne an

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

175

Table 9
Clinical history and status of CERE-120.
Study (protocol no.)

Year started–
completed

Phase 1 (CERE-120-01)

2005–06

Phase 2a (CERE-120-02)

# Treated:
CERE-120

Other details

Information gained

12

12

2 Sites; open-label

Initial safety

2006–08

58

40

9 Sites; controlled, double-blinded

Additional safety; initial info re: efﬁcacy (mixed);
initial proof of concept established

Revised Phase 1 (CERE-120-09)

2009–10

6

6

3 Sites; open-label

Safety for nigra targeting; larger dose

Revised Phase 2b (CERE-120-09)

2010–13a

51

~ 25

11 Sites; controlled, double-blinded

Additional safety data; additional efﬁcacy
information

Long-term follow-up (CERE-120-03)

2006–ongoing

100 +

~ 85

Follow-up for 5 years, post-surgery
(controls and CERE-120)

Long-term safety and general PD well-being

a

# Subjects

Dosing completed; assessments continuing until early 2013.

appropriate human-equivalent dose for proceeding into the planned
clinical trial, using empirically-based scaling to account for marked differences in SN volume between species.

Dose-target optimized Phase 1/2b protocol: maximizing the effects of
CERE-120
A new ‘dose-target’ optimized Phase 1/2b protocol (CERE-120-09)
was developed in 2009, based on the insight gained from the initial
Phase 2a proof of concept data, the related autopsy evaluation, and
the results of the nonclinical studies evaluating the effects of CERE120 targeted to the SN. Also invaluable were the feedback and enthusiastic support received from a host of advisors and consultants, the principle investigators and neurosurgeons for the clinical sites we contacted
and others less directly involved with the program, such as the MJFF.
Several signiﬁcant protocol improvements were implemented in
an attempt to increase the rate and magnitude of a neurotrophic response to CERE-120, while also improving our ability to measure
clinical beneﬁt in a controlled trial. These changes include adding a
dose of CERE-120 directly into the substantia nigra (as brieﬂy described;
see Fig. 6), increasing the dose 4-fold to the putamen (justiﬁed on the
basis of the additional clinical and nonclinical safety data generated
with CERE-120 since the program was launched), employing a longer
evaluation period (from 12 months to at least 15 and up to 24 months,
depending on the amount of time in the protocol since the subject was
dosed), and instituting several protocol changes intended to reduce the
placebo response as well as increase our sensitivity and power to detect
a treatment effect.

INITIAL DOSING PARADIGM:
Used in first Phase 1 and Phase 2a trials

The Phase 1 safety component of this study was initiated in late
2009 and successfully completed in mid-2010. It involved two dose
cohorts (the ﬁrst using the same putaminal dose as in the prior
Phase 2a trial and adding the SN dose; the second retaining that SN
dose but increasing the putaminal dose by 4-fold). No serious or
unexpected safety issues were noted (including no change in weight
of any subject), providing the evidence to justify advancing to the
Phase 2b double-blind, efﬁcacy/safety component.
The sham-surgery, double-blind, Phase 2b efﬁcacy/safety component of the protocol was powered at greater than 90% to see a difference
between sham and CERE-120 on the motor-off (part 3) UPDRS (Uniﬁed
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale), with half of the 50 subjects receiving
treatment and the other half receiving a sham surgical procedure. In addition to the efforts at Ceregene, the trial was conducted at eleven (11)
of the leading movement disorder medical centers in the United States
(University of California — San Francisco, Emory University, Baylor
University, Duke University, University of Alabama — Birmingham,
Stanford University, Columbia University, University of Pennsylvania,
Rush University, Beth Israel — NYC and Mt Sinai Medical Center —
NYC). It was launched near the end of 2010, with enrollment and dosing
completed in November 2011. Top-line data is anticipated in early 2013.
Synopsis of program
Over 20 nonclinical studies and 3 clinical protocols have now been
successfully completed with CERE-120 (Tables 5 and 9). To date, no
safety issues have been identiﬁed, despite dosing over 80 Parkinson's
patients up to 5+ years ago and literally hundreds of animals, at dose
multiple many times higher than required for efﬁcacy. Indeed, when

REVISED DOSING PARADIGM:
Used in ‘dose-target’ optimized Phase 1 and Phase 2b trials

Fig. 6. Comparison of two different dosing schemes used in CERE-120 clinical trials. Left: 4 separate needle tracts were used to distribute CERE-120 into the putamen (only) of each
hemisphere in the initial Phase 1 and Phase 2a studies. Right: 3 separate needle tracts were used to distribute a 4-times higher dose into the putamen of each hemisphere, as well as
an additional needle tract delivering CERE-120 directly to the substantia nigra of each hemisphere in the revised, ‘dose-target’ optimized Phase 1 and Phase 2b trials. These and
other protocol changes were implemented based on insight gained in the initial ‘ﬁrst-in-human’ controlled clinical trial of gene transfer combined with a neurotrophic factor.
All were intended to maximize the probability of eliciting and detecting a meaningful difference between the treated and control subjects in the current CERE-120 Phase 2b
multi-center, sham-surgery controlled trial.

176

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

one compares the safety record for CERE-120, relative to the collective
safety record for similar surgically-mediated interventional PD trials,
such as fetal and other tissue transplantations, as well as infusions of
GDNF using indwelling hardware, it is clear that the incidence of probable,
treatment-related SAEs is far higher in the latter efforts. Thus, ironically,
the use of gene transfer to improve the function of degenerating nigrostriatal neurons (e.g., by delivering neurotrophic factors) can now be
considered a far safer approach than the alternative methods used previously or currently. CERE-120 not only continues to provide safe,
long-term, persistent expressions of NRTN restricted to the targeted
brain regions, but also provides evidence of long-term, persistent neurotrophic activity.
Data from a past controlled trial in Parkinson's patients provided
proof of concept support for CERE-120's clinical beneﬁt, with several
relevant motor and quality of life endpoints showing statistically significant and clinically meaningful improvements in blinded comparisons
to sham treatment. Analysis of autopsy tissue qualitatively demonstrated the desired biological effects of CERE-120 in Parkinson's disease
brain, further supporting the clinical proof of concept. However, an
analysis of the clinical and autopsy data suggested that the effect was
not yet optimized and required an adjustment of the dosing paradigm
(directly targeting the substantia nigra). Thus, we sought to build
upon what we had learned from the initial ‘ﬁrst-in-humans’ Phase 1
and Phase 2 trials and better optimize the potential therapeutic effects
of NRTN while also improving the ability of the protocol to detect a
potential treatment effect. As stated in an independent editorial in
Movement Disorders: “As one of the few therapies immediately available that may not only slow PD progression, but also improve outcomes,
we feel that the potential beneﬁts of a clinically successful CERE-120
treatment cannot be ignored” (Lewis and Standaert, 2011). While the
outcome of any single clinical trial is uncertain and history warns us
that disappointing results can occur for a wide variety of reasons (including some having nothing to do with whether a treatment actually
works), it is hoped that, minimally, the insight gained and information
shared with the scientiﬁc/medical community during the course of developing CERE-120 will eventually prove valuable to others. Thus, in the
worse case, the ‘clinical proof of concept’ data generated for CERE-120
and the data, anecdotes and lessons accumulated along the way that
are shared herein, as well as in other publications, may prove helpful
to others as they continue the quest to develop neurotrophic factor
treatments for PD and other neurodegenerative diseases, as well as integrate gene transfer into more common translational activities.
Disclosure statement
The author is an ofﬁcer of Ceregene, Inc. (San Diego, CA), the company developing AAV-NRTN (CERE-120) as a treatment for Parkinson's
disease. He is paid a salary and has been awarded stock options by the
company.
Acknowledgments
Many people contributed to the body of work outlined in this perspective review and the author recognizes that far less would have
been achieved without the help, support and advice they provided.
First, the author gratefully acknowledges the role of Jeffrey Ostrove
(President and CEO of Ceregene), as we developed gene transfer as
an enabling technology to deliver neurotrophic factors to the brain
for Parkinson's disease (via CERE-120) and other serious, poorly treated
neurodegenerative diseases. Jeff contributed invaluable talent and
experience to the development of Ceregene's gene transfer programs,
having studied AAV as part of his PhD and later spending years leading
the manufacturing and process development activities of a commercial
facility. Thus, he brought immediate experience and sophistication in
cGMP manufacturing of viral vectors to Ceregene, which positively
inﬂuenced CERE-120's initial design, process and the establishment

of many controls, which in turn contributed directly to the excellent
safety record CERE-120 would eventually achieve.
Special recognition is also owed to Dr. Stephen Sherwin, who had
previously co-founded and served as CEO of Cell Genesys for years
(before it merged with BioSante Pharmaceuticals) and who truly
launched Ceregene as a corporate entity. While Mark Tuszynski and
Jeffrey Kordower are generally recognized as the early ‘scientiﬁc founders’ of Ceregene, given their appreciation that gene transfer might
provide the means for safe and effective delivery of neurotrophic factors to the brain, it was Dr. Sherwin who took the nascent ‘corporate
concept’ and contributed badly needed translational sophistication
and business savvy to give the company the initial credibility required
to recruit quality people while also securing the bulk of the company's
initial funding. Just as importantly, he recognized the need to substantially increase the IP (intellectual property or patent portfolio) far beyond
that established by the scientiﬁc founders. In keeping with this requirement, Ceregene licensed multiple patents from Cell Genesys and other
parties, covering a wide array of essential technology, including everything needed to manufacture viral vectors for therapeutic purposes.
Thus, Dr. Sherwin enabled Ceregene to acquire the crucial tools as well
as the necessary resources to make a serious run at using gene transfer
to deliver neurotrophic factors as therapeutics, and for this reason,
many consider him to be the ‘corporate founder’ of Ceregene.
Similarly, the contributions and advice from Ceregene's entire SAB
(Scientiﬁc Advisory Board) are gratefully acknowledged, including
those of Inder Verma (a pioneer in the gene therapy, oncology and
other ﬁelds), Rusty Gage (an early pioneer in neurotrophic factors,
gene therapy, stem cells and general neurodegeneration-related research), Gene Johnson (co-discoverer of neurturin and other neurotrophic factors and scholar on issues related to novel treatments for
PD), Jude Samulski (an early and continuing pioneer on the use AAV
as an important vector for gene therapy), Warren Olanow (an
internationally-recognized movement disorder specialist), Leon Thal
(a world-renowned Alzheimer's neurologist), Jeffrey Kordower (a
widely-recognized leader in animal models and neurotrophic factors
and long-time friend and collaborator) and Mark Tuszynski (a leader
in use of NGF and gene therapy for the cholinergic system). In particular, the advice and support of Jeffrey Kordower and Warren Olanow
for PD-speciﬁc issues early in the program, and Gene Johnson, Rusty
Gage and Inder Verma for numerous other gene transfer and
neuroscience-related issues deserve special acknowledgement related to the development of CERE-120. Additionally, other colleagues
who have been particularly helpful include Anthony Lang, Nicholas
Boulis, Ron Alterman, Joao Siffert, David Barba, Mehdi Gasmi, Dominick Vacante, Kathy Bishop and Chris Herzog. Also, special recognition
is given to all the scientiﬁc and clinical personnel at Ceregene who
made substantial contributions to the CERE-120 program, as often evidenced by their role as co-authors in the numerous publications emanating from the program. In this regard, Tiffany Baumann deserves special
recognition for major contributions to clinical operations and strategic
decisions since the initial Phase 1 CERE-120 trial, while also providing invaluable regulatory support to the author over the past several years. Sincere thanks and appreciation are also extended to the excellent neurology
and neurosurgical personnel at the sites participating in the CERE-120 trials. Without the help and involvement of all these friends and colleagues,
CERE-120 would not have reached its current stage of development.
I also acknowledge the important inﬂuence and support earlier in
my career by Arnold Lippa, Reginald Dean and Don Burstyn, as well as
encouragement received by Richard Pops during my 10 year tenure at
Alkermes to think out of the box and develop novel product concepts
within the conﬁnes of Alkermes' drug delivery technology. I thank
Dr. Chris Herzog and Monica Wynn for help and assistance in preparing this manuscript, including the tables and ﬁgures, as well as comments from Chris, Reginald Dean and Jeffrey Kordower on earlier
drafts of the manuscript. Finally, my heartfelt appreciation is given
to the MJFF (Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research) for

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

their continued interest, support (ﬁnancial and otherwise) during the
course of the several clinical trials conducted with CERE-120, as well
as the many courageous people with Parkinson's disease who volunteer to participate in experimental drug trials as well as agree to donate their brains so that much more might be learned and therefore
others might beneﬁt from their efforts.
References
Aebischer, P., et al., 1996. Intrathecal delivery of CNTF using encapsulated genetically modiﬁed xenogeneic cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Nat. Med. 2, 696–699.
Apfel, S.C., 2002. Nerve growth factor for the treatment of diabetic neuropathy: what
went wrong, what went right, and what does the future hold? Int. Rev. Neurobiol.
50, 393–413.
Apfel, S.C., et al., 1998. Recombinant human nerve growth factor in the treatment of
diabetic polyneuropathy NGF Study Group Neurology 51, 695–702.
Apfel, S.C., et al., 2000. Efﬁcacy and safety of recombinant human nerve growth factor
in patients with diabetic polyneuropathy: a randomized controlled trial. rhNGF
Clinical Investigator Group JAMA 284, 2215–2221.
Apkarian, A.V., et al., 2004. Chronic back pain is associated with decreased prefrontal
and thalamic gray matter density. J. Neurosci. 24, 10410–10415.
Azmitia, E.C., et al., 1988. Use of tissue culture models to study neuronal regulatory
trophic and toxic factors in the aged brain. Neurobiol. Aging 9, 743–758.
Backman, C., et al., 1996. Systemic administration of a nerve growth factor conjugate
reverses age-related cognitive dysfunction and prevents cholinergic neuron atrophy.
J. Neurosci. 16, 5437–5442.
Backman, C., et al., 1997. Carrier mediated delivery of NGF: alterations in basal forebrain neurons in aged rats revealed using antibodies against low and high afﬁnity
NGF receptors. J. Comp. Neurol. 387, 1–11.
Bankiewicz, K.S., et al., 2006. Long-term clinical improvement in MPTP-lesioned primates after gene therapy with AAV-hAADC. Mol. Ther. 14, 564–570.
Bartus, R.T., 1988. The need for common perspectives in the development and use of
animal models for age-related cognitive and neurodegenerative disorders. Neurobiol.
Aging. 9, 445–451.
Bartus, R.T., 1989a. Neurotrophic factors: can the degenerating brain be induced to heal
itself? Neurobiol. Aging. 10, 513.
Bartus, R.T., 1989b. Drug delivery to the brain: the problem lurking behind the problem? Neurobiol. Aging. 10, 621.
Bartus, R.T., 1997. The Calpain hypothesis of neurodegeneration: evidence for a common cytotoxic pathway. Neuroscientist 314–327.
Bartus, R.T., 1999. The blood–brain barrier as a target for pharmacological modulation.
Curr. Opin. Drug Discov. Devel. 2, 152–167.
Bartus, R.T., 2000. On neurodegenerative diseases, models, and treatment strategies:
lessons learned and lessons forgotten a generation following the cholinergic hypothesis. Exp. Neurol. 163, 495–529.
Bartus, R.T., Dean III, R.L., 2009. Pharmaceutical treatment for cognitive deﬁcits in Alzheimer's
disease and other neurodegenerative conditions: exploring new territory using traditional tools and established maps. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 202, 15–36.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 1982. The cholinergic hypothesis of geriatric memory dysfunction.
Science 217, 408–414.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 1983. Behavioral and pharmacological studies using animal models
of aging: implications for studying and treating dementia of Alzheimer's type.
Banbury Report 1515: Biological Aspects of Alzheimer's Disease. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, pp. 207–218.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 1996a. Dissociation of p75 receptors and nerve growth factor neurotrophic effects: lack of p75 immunoreactivity in striatum following physical trauma,
excitotoxicity and NGF administration. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 10, 49–59.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 1996b. Permeability of the blood brain barrier by the bradykinin
agonist, RMP-7: evidence for a sensitive, auto-regulated, receptor-mediated system.
Immunopharmacology 33, 270–278.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 1996c. Controlled modulation of BBB permeability using the bradykinin agonist, RMP-7. Exp. Neurol. 142, 14–28.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 1998. Sustained delivery of proteins for novel therapeutic agents.
Science 281, 1161–1162.
Bartus, R., et al., 1999. Use of Cereport (RMP-7) to increase delivery of carboplatin to
gliomas: insight and parameters for intracarotid infusion via a single-lumen cannula. Drug Del. 6, 15–21.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 2000. Evidence that Cereport's ability to increase permeability of rat
gliomas is dependent upon extent of tumor growth: implications for treating
newly emerging tumor colonies. Exp. Neurol. 161, 234–244.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 2003. Vivitrex, an injectable, extended-release formulation of naltrexone, provides pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evidence of efﬁcacy
for 1 month in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 28, 1973–1982.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 2004. A pulmonary formulation of L-dopa enhances its effectiveness
in a rat model of Parkinson's disease. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 310, 828–835.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 2007. Issues regarding gene therapy products for Parkinson's disease:
the development of CERE-120 (AAV-NTN) as one reference point. Parkinsonism
Relat. Disord. 13 (Suppl. 3), S469–S477.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 2011a. Properly scaled and targeted AAV-NRTN (neurturin) to the
substantia nigra is safe, effective and causes no weight loss: support for nigral targeting in Parkinson's disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 44, 38–52.
Bartus, R.T., et al., 2011b. Bioactivity of AAV2-neurturin gene therapy (CERE-120): differences
between Parkinson's disease and nonhuman primate brains. Mov. Disord. 26, 27–36.

177

Benabid, A.L., 2010. Reﬂection and reaction: gene therapy for Parkinson's disease: do
we have the cure? Lancet Neurol. 9, 1142–1143.
Bensadoun, J.C., et al., 2000. Lentiviral vectors as a gene delivery system in the mouse
midbrain: cellular and behavioral improvements in a 6-OHDA model of Parkinson's
disease using GDNF. Exp. Neurol. 164, 15–24.
Bjorklund, A., et al., 2000. Towards a neuroprotective gene therapy for Parkinson's disease: use of adenovirus, AAV and lentivirus vectors for gene transfer of GDNF to the
nigrostriatal system in the rat Parkinson model. Brain Res. 886, 82–98.
Bohn, M.C., 1999. A commentary on glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF).
From a glial secreted molecule to gene therapy. Biochem. Pharmacol. 57, 135–142.
Borg, J., et al., 1990. Peripheral administration of a long-chain fatty alcohol promotes
septal cholinergic neurons survival after ﬁmbria–fornix transection. Brain Res.
518, 295–298.
Braak, H., et al., 1999. Extensive axonal Lewy neurites in Parkinson's disease: a novel
pathological feature revealed by alpha-synuclein immunocytochemistry. Neurosci.
Lett. 265, 67–69.
Calcedo, R., et al., 2009. Worldwide epidemiology of neutralizing antibodies to adenoassociated viruses. J. Infect. Dis. 199, 381–390.
Charles, V., et al., 1996. Atrophy of cholinergic basal forebrain neurons following excitotoxic cortical lesions is reversed by intravenous administration of an NGF conjugate. Brain Res. 728, 193–203.
Choi-Lundberg, D.L., et al., 1998. Behavioral and cellular protection of rat dopaminergic
neurons by an adenoviral vector encoding glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor. Exp. Neurol. 154, 261–275.
Day-Lollini, P.A., et al., 1997. Hyperplastic changes within the leptomeninges of the rat
and monkey in response to chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of nerve
growth factor. Exp. Neurol. 145, 24–37.
De Vos, K.J., et al., 2008. Role of axonal transport in neurodegenerative diseases. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci. 31, 151–173.
Deuschl, G., et al., 2006. Deep brain stimulation: postoperative issues. Mov. Disord. 21
(Suppl. 14), S219–S237.
Elliott, P.J., et al., 1996. Intravenous RMP-7 selectively increases uptake of carboplatin
into rat brain tumors. Cancer Res. 56, 3998–4005.
Emerich, D.F., et al., 2001. The development of the bradykinin agonist labradimil as a
means to increase the permeability of the blood–brain barrier: from concept to
clinical evaluation. Clin. Pharmacokinet. 40, 105–123.
Eriksdotter Jonhagen, M., et al., 1998. Intracerebroventricular infusion of nerve growth
factor in three patients with Alzheimer's disease. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 9,
246–257.
Fischer, W., et al., 1987. Amelioration of cholinergic neuron atrophy and spatial memory impairment in aged rats by nerve growth factor. Nature 329, 65–68.
Friden, P.M., et al., 1993. Blood–brain barrier penetration and in vivo activity of an NGF
conjugate. Science 259, 373–377.
Gash, D.M., et al., 1995. Morphological and functional effects of intranigrally administered GDNF in normal rhesus monkeys. J. Comp. Neurol. 363, 345–358.
Gash, D.M., et al., 1996. Functional recovery in parkinsonian monkeys treated with
GDNF. Nature 380, 252–255.
Gasmi, M., et al., 2012. Needle assembly for use in delivering precise dosages of
proteinaceous pharmaceutical compositions and methods for use of same. US Patent
# 8092429 B2 Jan 10, 2012.
Gasmi, M., et al., 2007a. AAV2-mediated delivery of human neurturin to the rat nigrostriatal system: long-term efﬁcacy and tolerability of CERE-120 for Parkinson's disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 27, 67–76.
Gasmi, M., et al., 2007b. Striatal delivery of neurturin by CERE-120, an AAV2 vector for
the treatment of dopaminergic neuron degeneration in Parkinson's disease. Mol.
Ther. 15, 62–68.
Georgievska, B., et al., 2004. Overexpression of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor using a lentiviral vector induces time- and dose-dependent downregulation of
tyrosine hydroxylase in the intact nigrostriatal dopamine system. J. Neurosci. 24,
6437–6445.
Gill, S.S., et al., 2003. Direct brain infusion of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
in Parkinson disease. Nat. Med. 9, 589–595.
Hadaczek, P., et al., 2010. Eight years of clinical improvement in MPTP-lesioned primates after gene therapy with AAV2-hAADC. Mol. Ther. 18, 1458–1461.
Hefti, F., et al., 1989. Function of neurotrophic factors in the adult and aging brain and
their possible use in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiol.
Aging. 10, 515–533.
Herzog, C.D., et al., 2007. Striatal delivery of CERE-120, an AAV2 vector encoding
human neurturin, enhances activity of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal system in
aged monkeys. Mov. Disord. 22, 1124–1132.
Herzog, C.D., et al., 2008. Transgene expression, bioactivity, and safety of CERE-120 (AAV2neurturin) following delivery to the monkey striatum. Mol. Ther. 16, 1737–1744.
Herzog, C.D., et al., 2009. Expression, bioactivity, and safety 1 year after adeno-associated
viral vector type 2-mediated delivery of neurturin to the monkey nigrostriatal system
support CERE-120 for Parkinson's disease. Neurosurgery 64, 602–612.
Herzog, C.D., et al., 2011. Gene transfer provides a practical means for safe, long-term,
targeted delivery of biologically-active neurotrophic factor proteins for neurodegenerative diseases. Drug Deliv. Transl. Res. 1, 361–382.
Hoffer, B., et al., 1994. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor reverses toxininduced injury to midbrain dopaminergic neurons in vivo. Neurosci. Lett. 182,
107–111.
Hovland Jr., D.N., et al., 2007. Six-month continuous intraputamenal infusion toxicity
study of recombinant methionyl human glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(r-metHuGDNF in rhesus monkeys). Toxicol. Pathol. 35, 676–692.
Huang, E.J., Reichardt, L.F., 2001. Neurotrophins: roles in neuronal development and
function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 677–736.

178

R.T. Bartus / Neurobiology of Disease 48 (2012) 153–178

Inamura, T., et al., 1994. Intracarotid infusion of RMP-7, a bradykinin analog: a method
for selective drug delivery to brain tumors. J. Neurosurg. 81, 752–758.
Jacobson, K.A., et al., 1992. Synthesis and biological activity of N6-(p-sulfophenyl)alkyl
and N6-sulfoalkyl derivatives of adenosine: water-soluble and peripherally selective adenosine agonists. J. Med. Chem. 35, 4143–4149.
Jeste, D.V., Lohr, J.B., 1989. Hippocampal pathologic ﬁndings in schizophrenia. A morphometric study. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 46, 1019–1024.
Jonhagen, M.E., et al., 1998. Intracerebroventricular infusion of nerve growth factor in
three patients with Alzheimer's disease. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 9, 246–257.
Kirik, D., et al., 2000a. Preservation of a functional nigrostriatal dopamine pathway by
GDNF in the intrastriatal 6-OHDA lesion model depends on the site of administration of the trophic factor. Eur. J. Neurosci. 12, 3871–3882.
Kirik, D., et al., 2000b. Long-term rAAV-mediated gene transfer of GDNF in the rat
Parkinson's model: intrastriatal but not intranigral transduction promotes functional regeneration in the lesioned nigrostriatal system. J. Neurosci. 20, 4686–4700.
Kohn, D.B., et al., 2003. Occurrence of leukaemia following gene therapy of X-linked
SCID. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 477–488.
Kordower, J.H., et al., 1988. Nerve growth factor receptor immunoreactivity in the nonhuman primate (Cebus apella): distribution, morphology, and colocalization with
cholinergic enzymes. J. Comp. Neurol. 277, 465–486.
Kordower, J.H., et al., 1994. Intravenous administration of a transferrin receptor
antibody-nerve growth factor conjugate prevents the degeneration of cholinergic
striatal neurons in a model of Huntington disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
91, 9077–9080.
Kordower, J.H., et al., 1999. Clinicopathological ﬁndings following intraventricular
glial-derived neurotrophic factor treatment in a patient with Parkinson's disease.
Ann. Neurol. 46, 419–424.
Kordower, J.H., et al., 2000. Neurodegeneration prevented by lentiviral vector delivery
of GDNF in primate models of Parkinson's disease. Science 290, 767–773.
Kordower, J.H., et al., 2006. Delivery of neurturin by AAV2 (CERE-120)-mediated gene
transfer provides structural and functional neuroprotection and neurorestoration
in MPTP-treated monkeys. Ann. Neurol. 60, 706–715.
Kotzbauer, P.T., et al., 1996. Neurturin, a relative of glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic
factor. Lett. Nat. 384, 467–470.
Lang, A.E., et al., 2006. Randomized controlled trial of intraputamenal glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor infusion in Parkinson disease. Ann. Neurol. 59, 459–466.
LaVail, M.M., et al., 1998. Protection of mouse photoreceptors by survival factors in retinal degenerations. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 39, 592–602.
Lewis, T.B., Standaert, D.G., 2011. Parkinson's disease, primates, and gene therapy: vive
la difference? Mov. Disord. 26, 2–3.
Li, Z., et al., 1993. Peptide alpha-keto ester, alpha-keto amide, and alpha-keto acid inhibitors of calpains and other cysteine proteases. J. Med. Chem. 36, 3472–3480.
Maillard, M.C., et al., 1994. Adenosine receptor prodrugs: synthesis and biological
activity of derivatives of potent, A1-selective agonists. J. Pharm. Sci. 83, 46–53.
Manfredsson, F.P., et al., 2009a. Tight Long-term dynamic doxycycline responsive
nigrostriatal GDNF using a single rAAV vector. Mol. Ther. 17, 1857–1867.
Manfredsson, F.P., et al., 2009b. Nigrostriatal rAAV-mediated GDNF overexpression induces robust weight loss in a rat model of age-related obesity. Mol. Ther. 17, 980–991.
Marks Jr., W.J., et al., 2008. Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal delivery of CERE120 (adeno-associated virus serotype 2-neurturin) to patients with idiopathic
Parkinson's disease: an open-label, phase I trial. Lancet Neurol. 7, 400–408.
Marks Jr., W.J., et al., 2010. Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson's disease: a
double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 9, 1164–1172.
McCown, T.J., 2011. Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors in the CNS. Curr. Gene Ther.
11, 181–188.
McGrath, J., et al., 2002. Adeno-associated viral delivery of GDNF promotes recovery of
dopaminergic phenotype following a unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesion. Cell
Transplant. 11, 215–227.
McMahon, S.B., 1996. NGF as a mediator of inﬂammatory pain. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B, Biol. Sci. 351, 431–440.
Miller, R.G., et al., 1996. A placebo-controlled trial of recombinant human ciliary neurotrophic (rhCNTF) factor in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis rhCNTF ALS Study Group
Ann. Neurol. 39, 256–260.
Morﬁni, G.A., et al., 2009. Axonal transport defects in neurodegenerative diseases.
J. Neurosci. 29, 12776–12786.

Morrison, P.F., et al., 2007. Convective delivery of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor in the human putamen. J. Neurosurg. 107, 74–83.
Mufson, E.J., et al., 1999. Distribution and retrograde transport of trophic factors in the
central nervous system: functional implications for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Prog. Neurobiol. 57, 451–484.
Nauta, H.J., et al., 1999. Intraventricular infusion of nerve growth factor as the cause of
sympathetic ﬁber sprouting in sensory ganglia. J. Neurosurg. 91, 447–453.
Nutt, J.G., et al., 2003. Randomized, double-blind trial of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in PD. Neurology 60, 69–73.
Overstreet, D.H., et al., 1999. Crews FT. Suppression of alcohol intake by chronic Naloxone
treatment in P rats: tolerance development and elevation of opiate receptor binding.
Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 23 (11), 1761–1771.
Pardridge, W.M., et al., 1991. Selective transport of an anti-transferrin receptor antibody through the blood–brain barrier in vivo. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 259, 66–70.
Penn, R.D., et al., 1997. Intrathecal ciliary neurotrophic factor delivery for treatment of
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (phase I trial). Neurosurgery 40, 94–99 discussion
99–100.
Pezet, S., McMahon, S.B., 2006. Neurotrophins: mediators and modulators of pain.
Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29, 507–538.
Raff, M.C., et al., 2002. Axonal self-destruction and neurodegeneration. Science 296, 868–871.
Raper, S.E., et al., 2003. Fatal systemic inﬂammatory response syndrome in a ornithine
transcarbamylase deﬁcient patient following adenoviral gene transfer. Mol. Genet.
Metab. 80, 148–158.
Rosenblad, C., et al., 2003. Long-term striatal overexpression of GDNF selectively
downregulates tyrosine hydroxylase in the intact nigrostriatal dopamine system.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 17, 260–270.
Roy, S., et al., 2005. Axonal transport defects: a common theme in neurodegenerative
diseases. Acta Neuropathol. 109, 5–13.
Salvatore, M.F., et al., 2006. Point source concentration of GDNF may explain failure of
phase II clinical trial. Exp. Neurol. 202, 497–505.
Salzberg-Brenhouse, H.C., et al., 2003. Inhibitors of cyclooxygenase-2, but not
cyclooxygenase-1 provide structural and functional protection against quinolinicacid induced neurodegeneration. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 306 (1), 218–228.
Saporito, M.S., et al., 2002. Discovery of CEP-1347/KT-7515, an inhibitor of the JNK/
SAPK pathway for the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. Prog. Med.
Chem. 40, 23–62.
Seiger, A., et al., 1993. Intracranial infusion of puriﬁed nerve growth factor to an Alzheimer
patient: the ﬁrst attempt of a possible future treatment strategy. Behav. Brain Res. 57,
255–261.
Sheline, Y.I., et al., 1999. Depression duration but not age predicts hippocampal volume
loss in medically healthy women with recurrent major depression. J. Neurosci. 19,
5034–5043.
Sherer, T.B., et al., 2006. Crossroads in GDNF therapy for Parkinson's disease. Mov. Disord.
21, 136–141.
Slevin, J.T., et al., 2005. Improvement of bilateral motor functions in patients with
Parkinson disease through the unilateral intraputaminal infusion of glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor. J. Neurosurg. 102, 216–222.
Snider, W.D., Johnson Jr., E.M., 1989. Neurotrophic molecules. Ann. Neurol. 26,
489–506.
Sofroniew, M.V., et al., 2001. Nerve growth factor signaling, neuroprotection, and neural repair. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 1217–1281.
Su, X., et al., 2009. Safety evaluation of AAV2-GDNF gene transfer into the dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway in aged and parkinsonian rhesus monkeys. Hum. Gene
Ther. 20, 1627–1640.
Tuszynski, M.H., et al., 1996. Gene therapy in the adult primate brain: intraparenchymal
grafts of cells genetically modiﬁed to produce nerve growth factor prevent cholinergic
neuronal degeneration. Gene Ther. 3, 305–314.
Tuszynski, M.H., et al., 2005. A phase I clinical trial of nerve growth factor gene therapy
for Alzheimer disease. Nat. Med. 1–5.
Wang, L.H., Johnson Jr., E.M., 2008. Mixed lineage kinase inhibitor CEP-1347 fails to
delay disability in early Parkinson disease. Neurology 71, 462 author reply
462–3.
Wellmer, A., et al., 2001. A double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial of recombinant human brain-derived neurotrophic factor (rhBDNF) in diabetic polyneuropathy.
J. Peripher. Nerv. Syst. 6, 204–210.

