comprehensive assessment of inference
algorithms. As the authors point out, information-theoretic approaches are not ideal
for reconstructing small-scale networks,
but seem to do quite well for reconstructing large-scale networks. An obvious
development along these lines would be
to increase the size and complexity of the
gold-standard synthetic gene network by
including additional genes and interactions. Ideally, it would be useful to have a
library of diverse, gold-standard synthetic
gene networks, including ones consisting of 25–100 genes and varied network
architectures. As DNA synthesis capabilities become less error prone and more
cost effective, creating such a library will
become feasible.
It would also be useful to expand the
gold-standard synthetic networks to
include additional components, such as
small RNAs and microRNAs, and to take
account of pre- and posttranscriptional

and translational modifications. These
developments would enable one to consider multiple levels of regulation and to
integrate different types of data in network inference studies. These enhanced
capabilities could lead to the development of new systems biology techniques
and analysis tools.
The work by Cantone and colleagues
nicely illustrates the value of integrating the bottom-up network construction
approaches of synthetic biology with the
top-down network inference methodologies of systems biology. These efforts
will be applicable to many different
organisms, and may one day enable us
to reverse engineer the gene regulatory
networks that make up an elephant.
References
Bonneau, R. (2008). Nat. Chem. Biol. 4, 658–664.
Camacho, D., Vera Licona, P., Mendes, P., and

Laubenbacher, R. (2007). Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1115,
73–89.
Cantone, I., Marucci, L., Iorio, F., Ricci, M.A., Belcastro, V., Bansal, M., di Bernardo, M., Santini, S.,
di Bernardo, D., and Cosma, M.P. (2009). Cell, this
issue.
di Bernardo, D., Thompson, M.J., Gardner, T.S.,
Chobot, S.E., Eastwood, E.L., Wojtovich, A.P., Elliot,
S.J., Schaus, S.E., and Collins, J.J. (2005). Nat. Biotechnol. 23, 377–383.
Faith, J.J., Hayete, B., Thaden, J.T., Mogno, I., Wierzbowski, J., Cottarel, G., Kasif, S., Collins, J.J., and
Gardner, T.S. (2007). PLoS Biol. 5, e8.
Gardner, T.S., di Bernardo, D., Lorenz, D., and Collins, J.J. (2003). Science 301, 102–105.
Kohanski, M.A., Dwyer, D.J., Wierzbowski, J., Cottarel, G., and Collins, J.J. (2008). Cell 135, 679–690.
Lorenz, D.R., Cantor, C.R., and Collins, J.J. (2009).
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 1145–1150.
Margolin, A.A., Nemenman, I., Basso, K., Wiggins,
C., Stolovitzky, G., Dalla Favera, R., and Califano, A.
(2006). BMC Bioinformatics 7 (Suppl 1), S7.
Yu, J., Smith, V.A., Wang, P.P., Hartemink, A.J., and
Jarvis, E.D. (2004). Bioinformatics 20, 3594–3603.

A Nurr1 Pathway for Neuroprotection
Steven J. Bensinger1,3 and Peter Tontonoz2,3,*

Institute for Molecular Medicine
Howard Hughes Medical Institute
3
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
*Correspondence: ptontonoz@mednet.ucla.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.024
1
2

Mutations in the gene encoding the orphan nuclear receptor Nurr1 are linked to a rare familial
form of Parkinson’s disease. By examining the function of its mouse homolog, Saijo et al. (2009)
provide evidence that Nurr1 protects dopaminergic neurons by suppressing inflammatory gene
expression in astrocytes and microglia.
Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by tremors
and rigidity, that results from the progressive loss of dopamine-producing neurons
in the substantia nigra of the brain. Among
the genetic factors contributing to the
disease are rare mutations in the orphan
nuclear receptor Nurr1 (also known as
NR4A2) that are associated with a familial
late-onset form of the disease (Le et al.,
2003). Prior work on Nurr1 is consistent
with the view that this protein might medi26 Cell 137, April 3, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc.

ate its neuroprotective effects primarily
through its function in neurons. Nurr1 was
initially characterized in rats as a transcription factor that regulates expression
of the gene encoding tyrosine hydroxylase, a key enzyme in dopamine synthesis
(Sakurada et al., 1999). Genetic deletion
of Nurr1 in mice inhibits the development of midbrain dopamine-producing
neurons (Zetterstrom et al., 1997), and
the dopaminergic neurons of heterozygous null mice are more susceptible to

neurotoxic challenge than those of wildtype mice (Le et al., 1999). In this issue,
Saijo et al. (2009) present evidence for an
unexpected mechanism by which Nurr1
mediates neuroprotection. These authors
show that mouse Nurr1 acts in microglia
and astrocytes to suppress the production of inflammatory mediators that trigger the death of dopaminergic neurons.
The NR4A subfamily of nuclear receptors consists of three members: NR4A1,
NR4A2, and NR4A3 (also known as Nur77,

Nurr1, and Nor1) (Maxwell and Muscat,
2006). Unlike many other nuclear receptors, the NR4As do not possess ligandbinding cavities. Instead, NR4As are
immediate early genes whose expression
is induced by various stimuli including
cyclic AMP, growth factors, inflammatory signals, and hormones. The activity
of NR4A is thought to be controlled primarily at the level of protein expression
and posttranscriptional regulation. NR4A
receptors positively regulate the expression of target genes by directly binding
to response elements in their promoters
(Maxwell and Muscat, 2006).
In addition to positively regulating gene
expression, nuclear receptors can also
inhibit transcription. Recent work from
several groups has begun to elucidate
the transcriptional mechanisms through
which nuclear receptors repress inflammatory gene expression. For example,
the ligand-activated nuclear receptors
PPAR and LXR inhibit inflammation
through protein-protein interactions with
the inflammatory transcription factor
NF-κB (Bensinger and Tontonoz, 2008).
Importantly, this so-called “transrepression” mechanism does not depend
on direct binding of the receptors to
response elements in target promoters.
Instead, ligation of PPAR and LXR inhibits inflammatory gene expression by preventing the inflammatory signal-specific
removal of the corepressor complexes
containing SMRT and NCoR from inflammatory gene promoters (Ghisletti et al.,
2007; Pascual et al., 2005).
Saijo et al. now reveal a previously
unappreciated function for Nurr1—
the repression of inflammatory gene
expression. This repression provides
protection from the damaging effects
of neuroinflammation and suggests
new potential mechanisms linking Nurr1
function and Parkinson’s disease. The
authors set the stage for their discovery by administering lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) to the substantia nigra of mice
using stereotaxic injections (a technique that uses a coordinate system
to precisely target an injection needle
to particular regions of the brain). This
treatment triggers local inflammation
and leads to a loss of neurons expressing tyrosine hydroxylase (TH+). They
demonstrate that inflammation induces
Nurr1 expression and that local knock-

Figure 1. A Nurr1 Pathway for Transrepression of Inflammatory Gene Expression
A model for Nurr1 transrepression based on the work of Saijo et al. (2009).
(A) Inflammatory signals promote the expression of inflammatory genes through activation of NF-κB
signaling and the recruitment of coactivator complexes, such as p300/CBP, by the NF-κB subunit p65
to inflammatory promoters.
(B) In cells expressing Nurr1, such as microglia, inflammatory signals also trigger Nurr1 phosphorylation
(by Nemo-like kinase; NLK) and sumoylation. This promotes its interaction with p65 leading to the recruitment of the CoREST complex to the promoters of inflammatory genes.

down of Nurr1 (by injection of lentiviral
vectors expressing short-hairpin RNAs)
enhances the loss of TH+ neurons.
Interestingly, the primary targets for the
neuroprotective effects of Nurr1 appear
to be the neighboring microglia and
astrocytic cells rather than the neurons
themselves. In vitro studies with microglia and astrocytes implicate these support cells in the release of neurotoxic
factors that induce neuronal death.
Building on their previous studies of
the anti-inflammatory action of PPAR and
LXR, the authors investigated the mechanisms underlying the protective effects of
Nurr1. Examination of isolated microglia
and astrocytes demonstrates that Nurr1
is a potent repressor of inflammatory
gene expression in these cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis
indicates that Nurr1 is recruited to the promoters of LPS-responsive genes. Interestingly, the ability of Nurr1 to inhibit these
promoters is signal specific but does not
require direct binding to a specific DNA
sequence. Thus, Nurr1 appears to act
as a transrepressor, similar to the liganddependent nuclear receptors PPAR and
LXR. The authors provide evidence from
coimmunoprecipitation experiments that
Nurr1-mediated transrepression involves
the physical association of Nurr1 with the
p65 subunit of NF-κB (Figure 1). Mutations

in key phosphorylation sites, coupled
with the use of kinase inhibitors, identify
GSK3β-mediated phosphorylation of p65
as a signal for recruitment of Nurr1 to p65.
Phosphorylation of serine 468 drives the
interaction of Nurr1 and p65, resulting in
the attenuation of inflammatory gene transcription by NF-κB. Analogous to PPARand LXR-mediated transrepression, Nurr1
repression of inflammatory promoters also
requires sumoylation of Nurr1 at key lysine
residues (Ghisletti et al., 2007; Pascual
et al., 2005). Treatment of cells with the
inflammatory cytokine interleukin 1β (IL-1β)
promotes Nurr1 sumoylation.
Another important piece in this puzzle is the CoREST repressor complex,
which the authors identify as an essential player in Nurr1-mediated transrepression. Previous work has shown that
CoREST represses the expression of
neural-specific genes in non-neural cells
via binding to specific silencing elements
(Ballas et al., 2005). CoREST recruits an
array of proteins to target promoters in
order to effect repression. These include
histone deacetylases (HDACs), the histone methyltransferase G9a, histone
demethylase, and lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1). The authors show that
Nurr1 interacts directly with CoREST and
find that recruitment of G9a, LSD1, and
HDAC1 is required for Nurr1/CoRESTCell 137, April 3, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc.

27

dependent repression. The authors also
report that the Nurr1-CoREST interaction is stimulated by phosphorylation of
Nurr1 by Nemo-like kinase. Lastly, ChIP
analysis of iNOS promoter occupancy
following stimulation by LPS suggests
a temporal model of transrepression in
which p65 binding precedes Nurr1 association, which is followed by recruitment
of ­CoREST to the complex.
The Saijo et al. study provides important insights into the ability of Nurr1 and
­CoREST to modulate neuroinflammation.
The work unravels molecular mechanisms
that may underlie human neurological disease and opens the door for future work on
inflammatory signaling in the brain. These
studies also provide a better understanding of how transrepression is achieved at
the molecular level. Interestingly, certain
components of the transrepression mechanism appear to be conserved between
different nuclear receptors, such as the
requirement for sumoylation and the interaction with NF-κB proteins and corepressors. At the same time, Saijo et al. illustrate
how different nuclear receptors utilize distinct corepressor complexes to repress
gene expression in a signal- and contextdependent manner.

Finally, the work prompts a number of
interesting questions to be addressed
in future studies. For example, the three
NR4A receptors (Nurr77, Nurr1, and
Nor1) regulate overlapping target genes
in some cell types. Do Nurr77 and Nor1
also interact with CoREST in response to
inflammatory signals? What is the relative contribution of transrepression and
direct gene activation in NR4A-dependent regulation of inflammation? Sumoylation appears to be a critical component
of the transrepression mechanism. In the
PPAR and LXR transrepression pathways, sumoylation of the receptor is triggered by ligand binding. Is Nurr1 sumoylation responsive to other cellular signals
in addition to IL-1β? Is the Nurr1/CoREST
transrepression pathway intact in monocytes and macrophages, and if so, does
this repression pathway also have a role
in peripheral inflammation? Lastly, there
is strong evidence that neuroinflammation contributes to the pathogenesis of a
number of diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease and multiple sclerosis. It will
be important to determine if this repression pathway is altered in these diseases
and whether NR4A receptors might represent potential therapeutic targets.

References
Ballas, N., Grunseich, C., Lu, D.D., Speh, J.C., and
Mandel, G. (2005). Cell 121, 645–657.
Bensinger, S.J., and Tontonoz, P. (2008). Nature
454, 470–477.
Ghisletti, S., Huang, W., Ogawa, S., Pascual, G.,
Lin, M.E., Willson, T.M., Rosenfeld, M.G., and
Glass, C.K. (2007). Mol. Cell 25, 57–70.
Le, W., Conneely, O.M., He, Y., Jankovic, J.,
and Appel, S.H. (1999). J. Neurochem. 73,
2218–2221.
Le, W.D., Xu, P., Jankovic, J., Jiang, H., Appel,
S.H., Smith, R.G., and Vassilatis, D.K. (2003). Nat.
Genet. 33, 85–89.
Maxwell, M. A., and Muscat, G. E. (2006). Nucl.
Recept. Signal 4, e002.
Pascual, G., Fong, A.L., Ogawa, S., Gamliel, A.,
Li, A.C., Perissi, V., Rose, D.W., Willson, T.M.,
Rosenfeld, M.G., and Glass, C.K. (2005). Nature
437, 759–763.
Saijo, K., Winner, B., Carson, C.T., Collier, J.G.,
Boyer, L., Rosenfeld, M.G., Gage, F.H., and Glass,
C.K. (2009). Cell, this issue.
Sakurada, K., Ohshima-Sakurada, M., Palmer,
T.D., and Gage, F.H. (1999). Development 126,
4017–4026.
Zetterstrom, R.H., Solomin, L., Jansson, L., Hoffer,
B.J., Olson, L., and Perlmann, T. (1997). Science
276, 248–250.

β-tting on p63 as a Metastatic Suppressor
John G. Clohessy1 and Pier Paolo Pandolfi1,*

Cancer Genetics Program, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center and Department of Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA
*Correspondence: ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.028

1

Although much is known about the genes that promote metastasis, few suppressors of metastasis
have been found. Adorno et al. (2009) now identify p63 as a potent suppressor of metastasis and
uncover an intricate mechanism for the inactivation of metastasis in cancer cells in response to
transforming growth factor β.
Cancer progression from the primary
phase to the metastatic phase represents one of the key determinants
of prognosis and outcome for cancer
patients. However, the mechanistic
details behind the metastatic spread of
cancer remain obscure. Although the
28 Cell 137, April 3, 2009 ©2009 Elsevier Inc.

cytokine transforming growth factor β
(TGFβ) has emerged as a major player in
the metastatic process, it has seemingly
contradictory functions. Ordinarily a
tumor suppressor that mediates growth
arrest and apoptosis, TGFβ appears to
take on the opposite role in end-stage

tumors where it promotes metastasis
(Padua and Massague, 2009). Reporting
in this issue of Cell, Adorno et al. (2009)
identify a mechanism in cells expressing mutant p53, which enables TGFβ to
switch to an oncogenic role by promoting mutant p53-mediated suppression of

