JOURNAL OF

SPORT EXERCISE
PSYCHOLOGY

Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 2013, 35, 168-179
© 2013 Human Kinetics, Inc.

Official Journal of NASPSPA

www.JSEP-Journal.com
ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Effects of Multiple Concussions
on Retired National Hockey League Players
Jeffrey G. Caron,1 Gordon A. Bloom,1 Karen M. Johnston,2 and Catherine M. Sabiston1,2
1McGill University; 2University of Toronto

The purpose of this study was to understand the meanings and lived experiences of multiple concussions in
professional hockey players using hermeneutic, idiographic, and inductive approaches within an interpretative
phenomenological analysis. The interviewer was an athlete who had suffered multiple concussions, and the
interviewees were five former National Hockey League athletes who had retired due to medically diagnosed
concussions suffered during their careers. The men discussed the physical and psychological symptoms they
experienced as a result of their concussions and how the symptoms affected their professional careers, personal
relationships, and quality of life. The former professional athletes related these symptoms to the turmoil that
is ever present in their lives. These findings are of interest to athletes, coaches, sport administrators, family
members, sport psychology practitioners, and medical professionals, as they highlight the severity of shortand long-term effects of concussions.
Keywords: concussions, hockey, depression, social support
Athletes of all ages and skill levels participate in ice
hockey. Despite its popularity, participation in this sport
involves the risk of injury due to the aggressive nature of
the game, where players can reach speeds up to 30 mph
(Flik, Lyman, & Marx, 2005). Musculoskeletal injuries
occur frequently and injured athletes follow a predictable rehabilitation timeline. Another type of injury,
concussion, is a growing concern in hockey (Benson,
Meeuwisse, Rizos, Kang, & Burke, 2011; Echlin et al.,
2010). Unlike most musculoskeletal injuries, concussions are invisible (i.e., no swelling, stitches) injuries
(Bloom, Horton, McCrory, & Johnston, 2004), and often
there is no timeline for recovery (McCrory et al., 2009).
Furthermore, concussed athletes cannot resume activity
until their physical symptoms have subsided (McCrory
et al., 2009). These unique attributes of concussions
likely present novel challenges for sport psychology
researchers and practitioners, especially since little is
known about how athletes describe and make sense of
their experiences of the invisible, persistent facets of
concussion.
Echlin and colleagues (2010) measured concussion
incidence among Canadian Junior ice hockey players.
The authors found these athletes suffered 21.5 concussions per 1000 athlete exposures, a rate 3.3 times higher
Jeffrey G. Caron and Gordon A. Bloom are with Department
of Kinesiology and Physical Education, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Karen M. Johnston and Catherine
M. Sabiston are with the University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

168

than previously thought. In addition to the growing
number of concussions, Benson and colleagues (2011)
found that multiple concussions caused National Hockey
League (NHL) players to miss lengthier periods of time
and experience more severe postconcussion symptoms.
Commonly reported postconcussion physical symptoms
are headaches, dizziness, fatigue, and sensitivity to light
(e.g., Benson et al., 2011; Echlin et al., 2010; McCrory
et al., 2009). However, there is evidence that athletes
may also encounter psychological postconcussion symptoms, including, but not limited to depression, isolation,
and anxiety (Chen, Johnston, Petrides, & Ptito, 2008;
Johnston et al., 2004). An anecdotal account from Gulli
(2011) reported that former professional hockey players
experienced symptoms of depression, anxiety, and in
some cases suicidal ideation after suffering a concussion.
In partial support of this finding, functional magnetic
resonance imaging scans of concussed individuals have
indicated similar neural responses in brain areas commonly linked with major depression (Chen et al. 2008).
Understanding the link between concussion and depression symptoms from the athletes’ perspectives would
complement this medical mapping and help to inform
tailored, individualized psychological skills programs.
Depression and anxiety symptoms may also be
perpetuated if severe postconcussion symptoms lead
to career termination for athletes in elite and professional sport. Athletes who suffered injury-based career
termination have had a more difficult transition to
postcareer retirement compared with those who had
control over their retirement (Taylor & Ogilvie, 1994;
Werthner & Orlick, 1986). Emotional responses of

Multiple Concussion Effects on Retired NHL Players   169

athletes who experienced involuntary career termination have included depression, substance abuse, and
suicidal ideation (Ogilvie & Howe, 1982; Werthner &
Orlick, 1986), although this literature has primarily
focused on athletes’ emotional responses to musculoskeletal injuries. Given the combination of physical and
psychological symptoms of a concussion, athletes who
retire as a result of suffering multiple concussions may
experience additional distress and reduced quality of life,
similar to outcomes reported following serious athletic
injuries (Kuehl, Snyder, Erickson, Valovich, & Tamara,
2010; Mihovilovic, 1968). It would therefore be valuable
to explore the concussion experiences of athletes who
have ended their careers due to multiple concussions to
understand how their lives are affected and to identify
potential modalities to target in sport psychology mental
training and injury management programs.
As part of a multimodal injury management program, social support may positively benefit athletes
who suffer psychological sequelae from concussions.
Horton, Bloom, and Johnston (2002) found that concussed athletes who attended support groups reported
improved mood and affect compared with athletes not
attending support groups. Social support has been identified as integral to the psychological recovery within the
sport injury and rehabilitation process (Bianco, 2001;
Wiese-Bjornstal, Smith, Shaffer, & Morrey, 1998) as
well as following traumatic brain injuries (TBI; Gan,
Campbell, Gemeinhardt, & McFadden, 2006). Although
TBI and concussion represent different injury constructs
(McCrory et al., 2009), it is possible that concussed individuals may also positively benefit from social support.
However, little is known about the role of social support
in managing athletes’ concussion symptoms and related
psychosocial outcomes. Furthermore, social support may
be more complex among professional male athletes given
the predominant environment of encouragement to play
through pain and the unwritten rules of masking injuries from coaches and sport medicine practitioners for
fear of being stigmatized by peers as lacking toughness
(Safai, 2003; Young, White, & McTeer, 1994). Exploring
the complexity of social support in the management of
concussion experiences among male athletes would be
valuable to help understand mechanisms to reduce their
physical, psychological, and social burden.
Concussion research in sport has been developed
primarily using quantitative methodologies to describe
the physiological and neurocognitive outcomes. These
findings have advanced the science of concussions within
post-positivist worldviews, while paying little attention
to the athlete’s personal experiences. Understanding
concussions from the perspective of the athlete is important since there is more to the concussion experience
than what can be read from medical scans and physical
symptoms. To date, there is limited opportunity for
athletes who have suffered multiple concussions to share
their experiences and the meanings of these experiences
using constructivist epistemology. These meanings and
the co-construction of athletes’ experiences with con-

cussions can advance research and practice and inform
the development of effective multimodal interventions aimed at managing concussions. For this reason,
interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA; Smith,
Flowers, & Larkin, 2009) was the ideal approach for the
current study focused on exploring the experiences and
meanings of concussions among former NHL players.
The hermeneutic tradition identified within IPA supports
the central role of the researcher(s) in the exploration of
the lived experiences of the target individuals. In this
way, advancing the understanding of concussions can
be done by making sense of the lived experiences of
former NHL players within the researchers’ collective
experiences as athletes, researchers, physicians, mental
performance consultants, and coaches. The idiographic
narrative element of IPA enables an understanding of the
individual athletes’ concussions within their particular
experiences holding different roles and responsibilities on the ice, in the locker room, and at home. The
meanings of concussions in the lives of professional
athletes can be explored as individual narratives as
well as shared constructions of reality used to make
sense of such experiences. In this way, IPA is also an
inductive approach that involves detailed examination
of a small number of cases, and making interpretations
across cases. These latter interpretations also foster the
integration of researcher experiences, existing theory,
and previous research findings if such interpretations
are evidenced in the data (Smith, 2004; Larkin, Watts,
& Clifton, 2006). Using IPA to focus on the physical,
psychological, and social perspectives as central to
meaning making of individual interpretations of significant life experiences makes it particularly well suited to
explore multiple concussions leading to career termination among professional athletes. Therefore, the purpose
of this study was to explore the lived experiences and
interpretations of NHL players who suffered multiple
concussions during their careers using IPA (Smith et al.,
2009). The specific research questions guiding this work
included the following: How do NHL players who retired
as a result of suffering multiple concussions experience
career termination and transition? What role do social
relationships play in the experience and recovery from
a concussion? Finally, how are NHL players affected
physically and psychologically by multiple concussions? These research questions were guided by the first
author’s experiences as an elite male hockey player, as
well as the varied experiences of our research team, and
were analyzed within the hermeneutic, idiographic, and
inductive traditions of IPA.

Method
Participants
Between November 2010 and May 2011, five Englishspeaking National Hockey League (NHL) players who
each competed professionally for more than 10 seasons
and who had been retired for at least four seasons were

170  Caron et al.

interviewed. More specifically, three participants played
the majority of their careers in the 1990s, one played
equally in the 1980s and 1990s, and one played equally
in the 1990s and 2000s. All of the former NHL players suffered severe medically diagnosed concussions
during their careers and retired due to symptoms from
their concussions. The men were recruited through
personal contacts with NHL administrators, members
of the sports media, as well as current and former NHL
players. Upon receiving approval from the university
research ethics board, eligible participants were sent
information describing the purpose of the study, method
of data collection, and consent forms. Each former NHL
player was interviewed individually for a period of 45
to 90 min in a mutually agreed upon location in North
America. All interviews were audio recorded using a
Panasonic RR-US591 recording instrument. Interviews
were transcribed verbatim and stored using the NVivo
software package.

Data Collection
The interview guide was created to gather information on
what the participants experienced (e.g., talk about your
first diagnosed concussion in hockey and how it occurred)
and how they experienced their concussions along with
the long-term effects (e.g., describe some of the difficulties
you experienced as a result of your concussions; describe
how the symptoms of your concussions affected relationships with those close to you). In response to some recent
critiques of IPA, the open-ended nature of the interview
guide was important to help prevent theoretical and
researcher biases from influencing the men’s constructions
of their experiences (see Allen-Collinson, 2009; Brocki
& Weardon, 2006), and to enable dialogue between the
former professional hockey players and the interviewer.
I (the first author and interviewer) was an elite-level
hockey player (Canadian Hockey League and Canadian
Interuniversity Sport) who experienced a number of sports
injuries during my hockey career, including concussions.
This background enabled me to build rapport with the
participants and helped me understand and use jargon
commonly used by hockey players during the interviews.
In addition, I was trained in qualitative methodologies and
conducted a pilot interview with a retired professional
hockey player before the main study began. The second
author observed a video recording of the pilot interview
to ensure I was effectively able to build rapport, explain
ethical procedures, and describe the interview format to
the participants. I kept a detailed journal comprised of
notes taken during the interview and immediately following the discussions that I had with each athlete. My
coauthors have expertise in sport and exercise psychology,
coaching, and sport medicine and were primarily involved
in the development of the interview guide, informing the
interview process, and assisting in making sense of the
findings from their respective expertise and knowledge in
concussions, stress and coping, social support, coaching
science, and mental health.

Data Analysis
According to Larkin and colleagues (2006), IPA is a
flexible perspective used to approach the analysis of
qualitative data. Accordingly, general guidelines for
IPA data analysis (Osborn & Smith, 1998; Smith et al.,
2009; Willig, 2001) and recommendations for establishing validity in qualitative research (Yardley, 2008) were
followed. Members of the research team had different
roles in the analysis process. I conducted the first three
steps, with the analysis process starting by my reading
and rereading of each transcript to get a sense of the
athlete’s story. The second step involved note taking on
thoughts and impressions pertaining to the information
in the transcript, followed by Step 3, which was a detailed
analysis of the events, situations, and experiences discussed in the interview. At this point, the meaning of the
events/experiences was explored based on a line-by-line
analysis, and my reflective journal was used to interpret
the discussions. Step 4 was a collaborative effort with my
coauthors that involved an identification and connection
of themes using my journal, analysis notes, and delayed
literature searches (Smith et al., 2009; Tamminen, Holt,
& Neely, 2013). Specifically, we collectively discussed the
findings and meanings, shared experiences, and literature
knowledge. We collectively identified profiles for each of
the participants, along with a detailed narrative and interpretation of their experiences. Each man was assigned a
pseudonym to maintain anonymity. These profiles were
used along with a delayed literature review to identify
emergent themes and to connect themes within and across
the players who volunteered for this study. Specifically,
we created a coding sheet for the first athlete’s profile,
and then mapped emergent themes onto this master list
for each subsequent player. Therefore, Steps 1 through
3 allowed me to reflect on these findings from my own
perspective as a former hockey player who has experienced concussions, and Step 4 enabled my coauthors and
me to look for similarities and differences in the men’s
experiences with concussions.

Results
Participant Profiles
Bruce conceded to playing a rugged style of hockey during
his professional career, and related his multiple concussions to a “workplace hazard.” Although he felt content
with the decision to retire from hockey, he described
challenges with his daily life, and certain endeavors in his
postathletic career. One of these challenges, about which
he wondered aloud during the interview, was whether his
inability to recollect details such as names and phone
numbers resulted from concussions or a natural aging
process. Bruce firmly believed these troubles stemmed
from his concussions (and style of play), which has occasionally affected him in his current occupation.
Gary could not say with certainty how many concussions he suffered during his professional hockey

Multiple Concussion Effects on Retired NHL Players   171

career. However, on a few occasions he suffered major
concussions that involved loss of consciousness, which
he described as “unfortunate” because he felt medical
personnel were more cautious returning him to play after
each subsequent collision. Accordingly, and somewhat
ironically, Gary was thankful he did not receive medical
clearance to play after suffering what turned out to be
his final concussion. It was evident in his tone and facial
expressions that resurfacing these experiences was painful
for Gary; however, he said he felt compelled to share his
story to help advance our understanding of concussions
and to help future generations of athletes.
James described himself as an aggressive player
during his professional hockey career. In fact, he listed
a number of times during games where he “could not
see” and had “trouble standing up” after being involved
in on-ice altercations (fights). James admitted this happened a number of times during his career, which served
as yet another reminder of the surprisingly high number
of undiagnosed concussions that occurred while he was
playing in the NHL. Retrospectively, James noted that
multiple concussions altered his mood and he “became
a different person.” He suggested that this altered mood
contributed to his failed marriage.
Paul played hockey in the NHL and another professional league. During the interview, I noted he was visibly
frustrated with the quality of care he received from inside
the game (i.e., team, league), and had it not been for what
he called “chance encounters” with caring medical professionals, he feared things may have turned out much differently. Specifically, he admitted he contemplated taking
his life as a result of his concussions and the ongoing pain
he experienced from his headaches.
Zach provided well-articulated and vivid descriptions
of the physical and psychological symptoms he endured
immediately following his concussions. In particular,
I could sense his vulnerability and uneasiness discussing symptoms he felt mirrored “paranoia.” He felt his
psychological symptoms were exacerbated by feelings
of isolation that resulted from negative interactions with
medical professionals. He described feeling that “no one
understood” what he was going through, which he admitted may have “led me down a dark path,” had it not been
for his coach, whom he said he is “forever indebted to.”
The aforementioned athletes discussed various concussion experiences that shared common characteristics,
including the ambiguous description of their concussion
events, physical symptoms, isolation and withdrawal,
emotional turmoil, social influences and support, and transition out of sport. These emergent themes are described
as embedded in the former NHL athletes’ experiences
with multiple concussions.

Uncertainty of Concussion Events:
I couldn’t tell you how many
concussions I had
Based on the collective experiences of my coauthors and
me, it was not surprising that the men were unsure of the

number of concussions they had suffered during their
careers. As a rule, hockey players do not show they are
hurt. Being tough and playing through pain are soughtafter qualities for every hockey player, which may involve
concealing injuries from opponents, coaches, and medical professionals: “I couldn’t tell you really how many
concussions I had. My guess would be five or six but
probably none documented—even after being knocked
out cold.”—James
I can’t remember my first one. I have four documented concussions and there are numerous ones that
I played through. There’s no way I could ever put a
number on it because it was never really recognized
as a concussion. It is well north of ten.—Gary
The number of heavy collisions and likely undetected
head injuries may lead to an anxiety since there is no
understanding of the long-term implications that might
result from concussion experiences. Furthermore, the
men in this study played the majority of their careers
in an era when concussion knowledge and research was
in its infancy. Although none of the men alluded to the
culture or era of hockey explicitly, we interpreted the
language used, nonverbal communication, and underlying
meanings as being unlikely that these men would have
sought medical attention even if they suspected they had
a concussion.

Physical Symptoms:
For me it was headaches, sleep patterns,
dizziness, and loss of peripheral vision
The men identified physical symptoms that they suffered
after being concussed. Four of the players described
vision impairments: “I played in [name of city] that night.
I took a face-off and everything went blurry and I got
scared. And somehow I held it together I guess. I don’t
even remember the game.”—Zach
I went to the penalty box and couldn’t see out of my
left eye. My vision was all blurry. Everything was
blurry in the whole eye. Couldn’t see out of it, but
I played the rest of the game. But I was obviously
worried because I couldn’t see.—James
Although it is disconcerting that these players continued
to play with vision impairments, the culture of hockey
encourages a warrior mentality, which includes playing
through pain and injury. Even at amateur levels of hockey,
athletes are directly (or indirectly) pressured by teammates, coaches, and parents to continue playing despite
being injured, and often, are celebrated for doing so.
The men were alarmed by their loss of vision and
some feared they would never completely recover: “I
had to get used to it because this might be the new me.
Eventually things opened up and I got my peripherals
back” (Paul). Although they jokingly discussed some
of these events, it was evident from the tone of their
voices that the uncertain timeline for recovery caused

172  Caron et al.

them distress. It may be the retrospective interviews
that enabled this overt display of coping with humor,
in particular since the men were describing symptoms
that dissipated with time. Prospective interviews with
athletes currently suffering such symptoms may reveal
a different pattern of emotion.
In addition to the more short-term, transient symptoms of concussions, all five of the participants said they
still experienced concussion symptoms (4–14 years after
retirement) in their day-to-day lives. For instance, Gary
noted, “There aren’t too many days that go by where I
don’t have some type of discomfort in terms of headaches
or head pressure. I don’t think it will ever resolve itself.
At this point it’s just keeping it manageable.”
I think I get tired more often than other people. There
are days when I just don’t want to get up because
I’m exhausted. And I don’t know how everyone
else feels, but I think I go through those lulls where
I’m a little more tired than the normal person. I get
headaches or those focus problems. Those are things
I have to deal with.—James
The most discerning discussions pertained to the
uncertainty that the men described about the quality of
their lives. For instance, some of the men inquired if
there had been new developments regarding the longterm consequences of concussions. It was challenging to
interpret expressions of hope and disappointment as the
men searched for a cure for their concussions. As Gary
noted, “just because you’ve retired doesn’t mean the
injury goes away.” This desire for more information on
the long-term consequences highlights the need for more
knowledge dissemination on the topic of concussions.
Participants also discussed persistent symptoms that
affected them on a daily basis, such as vision impairments, reading, and memory:
If I stare at you like I am, everything is a little blurry.
I don’t feel anything after the first 15 minutes but now
as we go on, I feel it a bit more because I’m concentrating and thinking about what I’m saying.—James
I’m not as sharp as I was communication-wise. I’m
not able to focus for long periods of time or process
things as well, or as quickly. I use to love to read.
But, you know, longer than a half-hour I still can’t
do it. And if I do, then I’m dead tired. I’m less tired
after going to the gym than I am after reading for a
half-hour.—Paul
Sometimes I still have trouble [retaining information]. And I find that I can’t remember phone numbers. You can tell me a phone number five times and
I can repeat it five times, yet I’ll still have trouble
remembering it.—Bruce
Although it was not explicitly stated, Bruce, James, and
Paul seemed to suggest that their multiple concussions
affected their abilities to perform many daily tasks.

Isolation and Withdrawal:
You’re on your own little island
In addition to suffering physically from their concussions,
all five participants felt that the psychological repercussions of the injury were detrimental to their professional
hockey careers, as well as to the quality of their lives.
For example, the athletes all felt they were adversely
affected by symptoms of isolation during their concussion rehabilitation:
For three weeks nobody understood what was
happening to me. I’ll never forget that because in
that three-week period I never felt so alone in my
life. And from that point, I went on a real downhill
spiral.—Zach
You’re on your own little island. . . . You’re not really
around the guys because the team doesn’t want
you around the guys. They don’t want injured guys
around. They don’t want that epidemic around and
you’re cast aside.—James
We interpreted isolation and withdrawal as the players’ admission of being alone and feeling that no one
understood their situations. The athletes said they felt
isolated because they were unable to socialize with
their teammates. Further complicating their feelings
of isolation, participants felt their coaches and general
managers specifically encouraged this alienation during
their recuperation, or at least did nothing to stop it
from occurring. It is understandable that the men said
they missed “being around the guys” while concussed
because an NHL regular season consists of 82 games
over a period of eight to ten months, where teammates
spend almost every day together. Teammates often feel
like family members, which may have intensified feelings
of isolation for the men when they were concussed and
separated from their teams.

Emotional Turmoil:
I’m really thinking that I’m losing my mind
We interpreted emotional turmoil as participants’ descriptions of stress, confusion, and depression. In particular,
the emotional turmoil that the men described varied in
intensity and timeframe, yet was obviously a significant
factor in their rehabilitation. In addition to feelings of isolation, Bruce and Zach felt they experienced symptoms of
anxiety and paranoia in the months following concussion:
Anxiety. Absolutely. That year was the worst I’ve
ever felt. I really believe that stress was a contributing factor too. Use the comparison of having your
foot on a gas pedal and everything is going too fast.
Everything was going too fast for me.—Bruce
It forever changed me because now I have a really
good understanding of what it must be like to lose

Multiple Concussion Effects on Retired NHL Players   173

your mind in a short period of time. Where it all
comes unraveled and you can’t make sense of things.
You’re processing things differently. I would get a
thought in my head and this is how I would describe
it: the thought would be the pinball and would shoot
out and bounce around. But in a pinball machine,
there’s an out through the flippers. I didn’t have a
hole in the flippers. So that thought would never
leave. It would grow and get bigger and bigger
and then it would turn into a migraine headache.
Five hours later there are still thoughts bouncing
around.—Zach

symptoms of depression in different ways, we could sense
their uneasiness with this topic because of the significant
difficulties they endured as a result of their concussions.
In spite of the uneasiness of reliving this period of their
lives, the men all expressed a need to share their experiences to help future generations of athletes.
In addition to suffering symptoms of depression,
Gary, Paul, and Zach discussed thoughts of suicide in
those immediate months, which was fostered by the
physical pain combined with feelings of isolation, anxiety, and depression. Paul described going online to find
information on suicide as a result of his daily pain:

The men often described this feeling of anxiety and
emotional turmoil as normative given the uncertainty
surrounding the injury. This was evident in Zach’s
vivid and well-articulated description of the symptoms
of paranoia he experienced. It was interesting how he
described his thought processes at the time and retrospectively discussed how these feelings were irrational
and uncharacteristic for him. Moreover, both Bruce and
Zach mentioned they often felt overcome with emotion
because no one could explain what was happening to
them. The concepts of isolation and the difficulty of
explaining the concussions as an invisible injury were
evident in discussions focused on feelings of anxiety
and distress.
Gary, James, Paul, and Zach talked about the depressive symptoms they endured as a result of their concussions and the effect on their families:

I was going on websites but my wife didn’t know.
When she finally found out, she was very scared. I
was at the point where I’d be driving along and would
think about going full speed and hitting the wall. Just
end it. The pain was unbelievable. I had headaches
every day for a minimum of three and a half years.
Not just a little headache where you want to take an
aspirin. I almost wanted to scream. If I had a day off
from my headaches it was like I won Super 7. I was
ecstatic, I could see, I could think. So many times I
just wanted to end it.—Paul

Went into a depression. There were two or three
months where I was down and out. I didn’t feel good.
I’d forget everything. Deep depression. Emotional,
because you think your career is over. Really, I think
my wife came home one day and I think I was under
the table crying.—James
It was very tough for the first couple of years and
especially through the depression. That was challenging but I think my family went through it worse
than I did. I was full blown, let’s say, dementia. So
I wasn’t really suffering anymore but everybody
watching around me was suffering. . . . They were
really worried.—Paul
The first time I went through a really deep depression. It was a very scary time. . . . If you hit your
head hard enough, things can get really confusing.
Things can come unraveled and you have no control.
. . . People don’t understand going from, in their
eyes, a hockey celebrity to the point where you can’t
walk out of your house. You can’t shave. You have
no desire to do anything. You’re depressed.—Zach
The complexity of the discussion changed when the men
began sharing symptoms of their depression. More specifically, the discussion shifted from occasional joking to
somber, pensive, and emotional reactions, even moving
some participants to tears. Although they described their

Seeing the expressions of pain and guilt in Paul’s eyes was
a powerful moment documented in my research journal.
Paul was able to revisit the daily pain he experienced
while simultaneously experiencing feelings of guilt
for contemplating suicide, and described the personal
meaning of the persistent headaches and symptoms that
emanated from his concussions. The headaches I endured
following my concussions were less persistent and dissipated with time, and during the interviews I could not
help but think about my life and how those headaches
could have affected me if they had continued for months
or years.
For Gary and Zach, their thoughts of suicide were
discussed by relating to other professional athletes who
had committed suicide:
I don’t know if you’re familiar with the [name of
player] story. . . . He was just at his breaking point
and he couldn’t deal with it anymore. And I get it.
I understand it. You don’t want it. Believe me. You
don’t want this for you or your kids. You don’t want
to wake up every day with a headache.—Gary
I’m optimistic by nature but I know what it’s like
to be pretty down. I have an understanding where
some people may not. I mean the suicide stuff. I
can understand where those guys get to that place.
I would never act on it. But I could understand how
the mind would take you there.—Zach
It was evident that discussing suicide was a challenging
topic for these men as they had downcast facial expressions and difficulty verbalizing their thoughts. The language used by Gary, Paul, and Zach gave the impression
they were searching for docile terms to portray their dark

174  Caron et al.

thoughts of suicide as well as to reassure me they were
not suicidal. Perhaps this explains why Gary and Zach
discussed suicidal thoughts in relation to other professional athletes.

Social Influences: “Do whatever you need
to do, I am here” versus “Just go out and
score some more goals”
Social influences were described as the people in the
men’s immediate environments following concussions,
including family, as well as hockey and medical personnel.
All five athletes discussed the role of their spouses
in providing support and encouragement during their
concussions. For instance, Paul said, “For at least three
years, my wife was like a single mom to our kids. I was
like an extra child for my wife and she took complete
care of me. She was very patient.” Similarly, Bruce
noted that, “My wife was well aware of the circumstances of my concussions. Well aware of the doctors’
suggestions and recommendations. . . . She was great
throughout the whole thing.”
My support system at home was terrific. My wife
gave me the freedom to seek out whatever therapy
I needed or wanted. If I had to get on a plane and
go see a doctor there was no problem—and I have
kids at home. So that’s a burden.—Gary
All the participants were aware of the burden their
concussions created for their wives, although it was not
clearly articulated whether this awareness came after
years of reflection or was perceived during the event(s).
In fact, James was quite certain that being apathetic
following his concussions led to his failed marriage:
My wife and I got divorced. I think concussions
were a big reason. I don’t think I treated her well
after them. I think I snapped. I think I became a
different person because of it. I just didn’t give a
shit for about two years. I didn’t realize it because
I never really got help. Now I’m conscious of it. .
. . But I think for about two years I took everyone
for granted and just didn’t care.—James
Athletes in this study described the social support they
received from coaches very differently. For instance,
Zach said the care and concern that he received from his
coach was certainly not the norm in hockey. In fact, he
described how he broke down and cried when his coach
pulled him aside after a game and asked if he was okay.
Zach was shocked that his coach noticed that something
was not right and was helping him seek care. He now
feels “indebted” to this coach, who Zach described as
telling him: “I don’t care what the doctors are saying.
I don’t care what the fans or media are saying; you’re
not playing, and we’re going to get you some help.”
However, some of the other men described very different stories, such as Paul who mentioned that coaches

and hockey personnel wanted to see concrete evidence
of his injury. “My coach couldn’t see an x-ray of my
concussion. No matter what coaches, general managers,
and players say, they didn’t respect concussions at that
time.” Paul suggested this attitude was a reflection of
the lack of knowledge pertaining to concussions even
up to 5 or 10 years ago. Based on conversations with the
other participants and personal experience, I fear that
the majority of concussed hockey players, professional
to amateur, who played during that era had experiences
similar to Paul.
Similar to the support some received from coaches,
the men had differing encounters with medical professionals after suffering their concussions:
[Name of doctor] was phenomenal. I remember
some emotional times when my doctor actually had
tears building up. It wasn’t just a science for them.
I wasn’t just a file and they weren’t just collecting
data. I was a human being. I was a husband. I was
a father. I was an athlete who had his career ended
and my doctor really, really cared.—Paul
In contrast, Zach discussed one doctor who attempted
to justify his feelings of “things starting to unravel”
by downplaying some of the symptoms he was experiencing and advising him he would feel better once he
scored a couple goals:
I remember feeling emotion and my eyes swelled
up and I got scared. I said, “Doc, I don’t care about
scoring goals right now.” The doctor said, “Well
I don’t know what else to do. Do you want to take
some time off?” I just walked out of there.—Zach
Zach was visibly frustrated with this interaction. He
felt he was not sufficiently supported by this particular medical professional and he felt this relationship
strained his recovery from concussion.

Professional Sport Transition:
I’m not a hockey player anymore;
I’m just a regular guy
We interpreted participants’ descriptions of OK it’s
enough, career over, stripped identity, and not a hockey
player anymore as being related to their transition from
professional hockey. Specifically, players discussed the
events surrounding the termination of their professional
hockey careers, as well as the obstacles they faced transitioning to their post-hockey careers.
All five players spoke in detail about their career
termination. Bruce, James, and Paul noted that, in addition to receiving recommendations from their doctors to
discontinue their careers, retirement from professional
hockey was influenced by discussions with their families.
Paul said, “I had spoken to my wife and she told me this
was the final straw. She said ‘If you don’t stop, we’re done.
I’m not going to watch you kill yourself. I’m leaving and
taking the kids, don’t call.’”

Multiple Concussion Effects on Retired NHL Players   175

It was my family and I . . . I weighed the pros and
cons of the amount of years that I could probably play
and the money I could make. I had already played
a lot of years and the only thing that was keeping
me in the game was that I hadn’t won the Stanley
Cup. But when I looked at my family, I wanted to
be around them more. I also wanted to help them
and not be a f***ing vegetable just sitting there.
—James
It was a group decision that I made with my wife.
We weighed the pros and cons of coming back
and I’m like “OK, it’s enough. I don’t want to get
punched in the head anymore. I don’t want to feel
bad anymore.” I wish I played more games. But I
won the Stanley Cup. I got to lift it above my head.
. . . I got to meet some great people and had a pretty
good run.—Bruce
Although Bruce, James, and Paul had discussions with
their spouses regarding the continuation/termination of
their athletic careers, there was a clear divide between
their experiences. After one of his concussions, Paul
said he was unable to sit or stand upright for any length
of time, so he spent the majority of his days lying down
in a dark room. He felt that his role as a husband and
father was greatly diminished so he understood his wife’s
hard-line approach when he contemplated resuming
his career. In contrast, Bruce and James credited their
decision to retire to open exchanges with their spouses,
which enabled them to reflect on their careers, families,
and long-term health. It is unclear whether having some
sense of control over their retirement ameliorated their
retirement process. Regardless, Paul, James, and Bruce
said they were confident they made the right decision
based on their doctors’ recommendations and discussions with their families. Alternatively, Gary and Zach
said they were forced to retire because their doctors did
not give them medical clearance to play. Both of these
men said they may have continued playing had they
received medical clearance. Gary described his effort
to return to play:
After my last concussion, I worked diligently to put
myself in a position where I could return to play.
I went in to see the doctor and he asked me how I
was doing and I said, “Good. You know, I’m doing
alright. A few more days, maybe another week and I
think I’ll feel well enough for training camp. I think
I’m just about there.” And he looked at me and said,
“I appreciate your effort and I applaud your courage but I’ll never clear you to play. I can’t. I could
never have that on my conscience. It would be my
responsibility if you went out there and anything
happened.” When I asked he told me my career
was over. When I was driving home I was obviously
upset, but at the same time I was relieved because I
needed someone to do that for me. Because I would
have kept trying to come back and play until I died,
or somebody told me to stop.

Zach had a unique anecdote on this topic. He said, “A
hockey player compacts his short career into what the
average person does in 35 years.” This notion provides
insight/rational into some participants’ desire to continue
their athletic careers after suffering significant concussion symptoms. All of the men noted they have a very
short period of time to pursue their dream of playing in
the NHL and to provide for their families.
Regardless of how their retirement was initiated,
participants were no longer identified as a professional
hockey player after they retired. For some, this made
their retirement more challenging:
My identity became the hockey player. You’re
signing autographs, you’re on TV and in the print,
and your identity gets wrapped up in that. And I
don’t think it’s necessarily an ego thing. It’s more
how you’re identified with people. My identity was
stripped from me when I retired and I had to reinvent myself.—Paul
Losing your sense of identity is the hardest thing in
the world. You go on the road, you go to the rink,
it’s that atmosphere that you had. Now you’re home
and you don’t feel great all the time. It’s the weirdest
thing to retire so young because it’s all you’ve ever
known. You’re not a hockey player anymore; you’re
just a regular guy.—James
Having invested themselves in amateur and professional
hockey for the majority of their lives, it was not surprising these men identified themselves as hockey players.
Moreover, loss of identity was evident in their somber
facial expressions and tone of voice while discussing
their early retirement.
In addition, two participants felt they have been
limited in their post-hockey careers because of ongoing
symptoms from their concussions:
As active as I am, my concussions have hindered my
ability to work at the highest level. I’m afraid that I’ll
get into a situation where I wouldn’t be able to fulfill
a commitment or an obligation. So, I wouldn’t be
able to travel if I became a scout, general manager,
or coach because my head wouldn’t allow me. I can
get through my day and do stuff but if I need a rest,
I can take a rest. If I need to take a nap, I can find
a way to go take a nap in the middle of the day. If
you have a job where you’re being relied upon, you
don’t have that kind of flexibility.—Gary
I know that I could never be an 80 hour-a-week guy
on Wall Street. Numbers, computer screens, phone
calls, high pressure, high stress—no. My head would
explode. Also, I want to go back to school because I
want to finish everything, but I can’t do it. My head
won’t allow me to manage my family, schooling, and
my business.—Paul
Based on the dialogue in the interviews, it was clear
that the men were frustrated that the head injuries they

176  Caron et al.

suffered during their hockey careers not only prevented
them from attaining post-hockey careers they desired,
but also lingered as daily reminders of their lost identities.

Discussion
Former NHL players were interviewed to better understand their lived experiences with multiple concussions.
Based on the findings, professional athletes were (and
remain) significantly affected by their head injuries in
their postathletic careers and personal relationships. This
study provided the first qualitative account regarding the
severity and persistence of physical and psychological
effects of concussions on retired professional athletes.
These findings advance research on the long-term
postconcussion effects and add to the ever-increasing
list of possible outcomes, including chronic traumatic
encephalopathy (Stern et al., 2011) and mood disorders
and dementia (Gavett, Stern, & McKee, 2011; Stern et
al., 2011). This line of research is still in its infancy
(McCrory, 2011), and our results demonstrate, through
personal accounts of former professional hockey players, the long-term effects of concussions on multiple
quality-of-life domains.
All players in this study felt debilitated by headaches, visual impairments, and other physical symptoms that resulted from the concussions they sustained
throughout their careers. As reported in other studies,
participants said they often hid these symptoms from
teammates, coaches, and medical professionals to continue playing (Clover & Wall, 2010; Delaney et al., 2002).
It is possible they were perpetuating the macho attitude
of playing through pain (Defrin, Schramm, & Eli, 2009)
that is often evident in male professional sports. Men are
more likely to downplay or hide injuries, in particular
as athletes of traditionally violent and aggressive sports,
such as hockey, in order to protect their identities as
“tough guys” and to abide by the culturally normative
ideals associated with being male (Messner, 1990; Young
et al., 1994). This protection of hegemonic masculinity
is likely stronger among athletes playing professional
sport, with the critical lens of teammates, NHL administration, and a substantial audience of spectators and
fans ever present (Melnick, 1992; Morra & Smith, 1996).
As such, there is no leniency to straying from the gendered and cultured views of how males should manage
injury—especially an invisible injury that was relatively
unknown even a decade ago. Based on our findings, a
greater awareness of the physical symptoms that occur
both immediately and persist long term can inform
management programs to help concussed athletes rehabilitate and avoid returning to play while symptomatic
(Safai, 2003), and also increase awareness at a societal
level to reduce the burden of male athletes’ living up to
hegemonic masculinity standards.
Athletes were removed from competition by their
coaches and medical trainers when they were unable
to hide their concussion symptoms. Similar to research

findings following sport injury, this lack of clearance to
play hockey increased their feelings of loneliness and
isolation (Bloom et al., 2004; Quinn & Fallon, 1999).
In line with some emerging research with athletes
(Chen et al., 2008; Johnston et al., 2004), participants
also experienced symptoms of anxiety and depression,
and some reported suicidal ideation, after suffering
their concussions. While it is difficult to differentiate
whether symptoms of anxiety, depression, and suicidal
ideation were initiated by participants’ concussions or
career termination, the combination of these psychological states suggests that professional psychological
counseling should be available to athletes during their
rehabilitation from concussion and transition to their
postathletic careers. For example, psychological skills
training has been found to help facilitate a healthier
transition from sport (McKnight et al., 2009; Taylor
& Ogilvie, 1994; Kontos, Collins, & Russo, 2004). In
addition, it is important to highlight that the men in
our study discussed their symptoms of depression and
anxiety although males are often less likely to report
these types of health concerns (e.g., Nolen-Hoeksema
& Aldao, 2011). Some researchers and clinicians argue
that this hesitation to report and discuss mental health
is a product of gender socialization such that men—and
especially professional male athletes—are “supposed
to be” tough (Messner, 1990; Safai, 2003; Young et
al., 1994). Therefore, when working with male athletes
who have suffered concussion injuries, sport psychology
consultants need to be aware of the potential likelihood
that these men may downplay the need for medical and
psychological counseling and rehabilitation.
Similar to evidence focused on elite skiers (Bianco,
2001) and individuals suffering TBI (Kreutzer, Gervasio,
& Camplair, 1994; Kreutzer et al., 2009), the men in our
study specifically identified their spouses as being the
most supportive people throughout their lengthy recoveries. The athletes also discussed the positive support
provided by their coaches and medical professionals
(Bianco, 2001; Rees & Hardy, 2000), although some
also pressured them in unsupportive and controlling
ways. An interesting finding from our study concerned
some of the negative comments from coaches and
physicians that silenced the athletes. Given that only
a few athletes discussed this topic, researchers should
consider examining this topic in more depth. Specific to
sport, Rees (2007) has argued that social support is an
important coping mechanism that helps athletes resist,
and as needed, recover from injury, while also fostering motivation. Based on the current findings, support
from family (directly from spouses and indirectly from
children) was imperative for managing the symptoms
of a concussion and the aftermath of career termination. Even though spouses, coaches, and medical staff
members appear to be the foundation of the athletes’
social support network, it was interesting to note that
teammates were rarely mentioned in the interviews and
appeared to play a limited role in the supportive network
both during and following concussions. This is contrary

Multiple Concussion Effects on Retired NHL Players   177

to most sport-related literature (e.g., Bianco, 2001; Rees
& Hardy, 2000), and future research is needed to focus
on the dynamics of the team when an athlete suffers a
concussion. A better understanding of the teammate’s
knowledge of concussion symptoms and the burden and
isolation during injury is also needed.
The current study enhanced the overall understanding of concussion experiences among former NHL
players. However, we acknowledge some limitations
when interpreting these results. First, the players were
retired up to 14 seasons at the time of the interview, and
therefore the recollection of specific events, emotions,
and experiences with respect to their concussions may
have been hindered. Second, there has been some recent
debate on the applicability and usefulness of using thematic analysis with IPA (Chamberlain, 2011). However,
we were careful to be transparent throughout our data
collection and analysis, and the categories presented
are illustrative of the analytical interpretation we used.
Third, playing style was not included in the selection
criteria (e.g., scorers vs. tough guys). It is possible that
athletes who play a more aggressive style (i.e., tough
guys) and who fight more often than others would have
different experiences with concussions than players less
involved in physical contact (i.e., scorers). There has
previously been much discussion of the role of hockey
enforcers in the literature from a sociological perspective (cf. Colburn, 1985; Weinstein, Smith, & Wiesenthal,
1995), and it is possible that the experiences of enforcers
would be different from other hockey players given their
aggressive playing style and propensity to play through
injuries on a regular basis.
Despite these limitations, the current findings offer
practical insights for athletes, family members, coaches,
sport administrators, sport psychology experts, and
medical professionals in all levels of sport by helping
to understand the short and long-term psychological
effects of concussive injury from the athlete’s perspective. Participants in this study noted they did not always
report symptoms of a concussion, which allowed them
to continue playing despite being symptomatic. Findings from Delaney and colleagues (2002) suggested
that professional athletes might have increased motivation (e.g., financial) to hide concussion-like symptoms
and continue playing. In addition, participants in our
study noted they were able to hide symptoms of a
concussion because it is an invisible injury. Bloom et
al. (2004) posited that concussions were unique from
other injuries because there are no visible signs, such
as crutches, swelling, or stitches. These current results
expand previous literature by adding that participants
may take advantage of the invisibility of concussive
injury and hide symptoms of a concussion from others.
This suggests that concussion education may be particularly important to ensure the long-term health and
well-being of these athletes. Findings from this study
may also benefit stakeholders such as the International
Ice Hockey Federation, NHL, Hockey Canada, and
USA Hockey to make hockey safer for athletes of all

ages and skill levels. Participants in the current study
reported they experienced physical symptoms such as
headaches and difficulty reading 4 to 14 years after retiring from professional hockey. At the third International
Consensus Conference of Concussion in Sport, McCrory
and colleagues (2009) called for researchers to implement longitudinal approaches to gain a more thorough
understanding of the implications of this injury. Our
results concur with this suggestion, and we hope that
our empirical results can be used to help researchers
and clinicians work with athletes, coaches, and family
members to help treat, manage, and assess the short- and
long-term symptoms of sport-related concussions. As
is evident from our findings, concussions have implications for athletes that extend far beyond the termination
of their athletic careers by affecting their interpersonal
and professional lives on a daily basis.

References
Allen-Collinson, J. (2009). Sporting embodiment: Sports
studies and the (continuing) promise of phenomenology.
Qualitative Research in Sport and Exercise, 1, 279–296.
doi:10.1080/19398440903192340
Benson, B.W., Meeuwisse, W.H., Rizos, J., Kang, J., & Burke,
C.J. (2011). A prospective study of National Hockey
League players during regular season games: The
NHL–NHLPA concussion program. Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 183, 905–911. PubMed doi:10.1503/
cmaj.092190
Bianco, T. (2001). Social support and recovery from sport
injury: Elite skiers share their experiences. Research
Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 72, 376–388. PubMed
Bloom, G.A., Horton, A.S., McCrory, P., & Johnston, K.M.
(2004). Sport psychology and concussion: New impacts to
explore. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 38, 519–521.
PubMed doi:10.1136/bjsm.2004.011999
Brocki, J.M., & Weardon, J.A. (2006). A critical evaluation of
the use of interpretative phenomenological analysis (IPA)
in health psychology. Psychology & Health, 21, 87–108.
doi:10.1080/14768320500230185
Chamberlain, K. (2011). Troubling methodology. Health
Psychology Review, 5, 48–54. doi:10.1080/17437199.2
010.520113
Chen, J-K., Johnston, K.M., Petrides, M., & Ptito, A. (2008).
Neural substrates of symptoms of depression following
a concussion in male athletes with persisting postconcussion symptoms. Archives of General Psychiatry,
65, 81–89. PubMed doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2007.8
Clover, J., & Wall, J. (2010). Return-to-play criteria following
sports injury. Clinics in Sports Medicine, 29, 169–175.
PubMed doi:10.1016/j.csm.2009.09.008
Colburn, K. (1985). Honor, ritual and violence in ice
hockey. Canadian Journal of Sociology, 10, 153–170.
doi:10.2307/3340350
Defrin, R., Schramm, L., & Eli, L. (2009). Gender role expectations of pain is associated with pain tolerance limit but
not with pain threshold. Pain, 145, 230–236. PubMed
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2009.06.028

178  Caron et al.

Delaney, J.S., Lacroix, V.J., Leclerc, S., & Johnston, K.M.
(2002). Concussions among university football and soccer
players. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 12, 331–338.
PubMed doi:10.1097/00042752-200211000-00003
Echlin, P.S., Tator, C.H., Cusimano, M.D., Cantu, R.C., Taunton,
J.E., Upshur, R.E.G., . . . Skopelja, E.N. (2010). A prospective study of physician-observed concussions during
junior ice hockey: Implications for incidence rates. Journal
of Neurosurgical Focus, 29, 1–10. doi:10.3171/2F2010.9
.FOCUS10186.
Flik, K., Lyman, S., & Marx, R.G. (2005). American collegiate men’s ice hockey: An analysis of injuries. American Journal of Sports Medicine, 33, 183–187. PubMed
doi:10.1177/0363546504267349
Gan, C., Campbell, K.A., Gemeinhardt, M., & McFadden,
G.T. (2006). Predictors of family system functioning after
brain injury. Brain Injury : [BI], 20, 587–600. PubMed
doi:10.1080/02699050600743725
Gavett, B.E., Stern, R.A., & McKee, A.C. (2011). Chronic
traumatic encephalopathy: A potential late effect of sportrelated concussive and subconcussive head trauma. Clinics
in Sports Medicine, 30, 179–188. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.
csm.2010.09.007
Gulli, C. (2011). The untold story. MacLean’s Magazine, 124,
56–62.
Horton, A., Bloom, G.A., & Johnston, K.M. (2002). The
impact of support groups on the psychological state of
athlete’s experiencing concussions. Medicine and Science
in Sports and Exercise, 34, S99. doi:10.1097/00005768200205001-00551
Johnston, K.M., Bloom, G.A., Ramsay, J., Kissick, J., Montgomery, D., Foley, D., . . . Ptito, A. (2004). Current
concepts in concussion rehabilitation. Current Sports
Medicine Reports, 3, 316–323. PubMed
Kontos, A.P., Collins, M., & Russo, S.A. (2004). An introduction to sports concussion for the sport psychology consultant. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 16, 220–235.
doi:10.1080/10413200490485568
Kreutzer, J.S., Gervasio, A.H., & Camplair, P.S. (1994). Primary
caregivers’ psychological status and family functioning after traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury : [BI], 8,
197–210. PubMed doi:10.3109/02699059409150973
Kreutzer, J.S., Rapport, L.J., Marwitz, J.H., Harrison-Felix,
C., Hart, T., Glenn, M., & Hammond, F. (2009). Caregivers’ well-being after traumatic brain jury: A multicenter
prospective investigation. Archives of Physical Medicine
and Rehabilitation, 90, 939–946. PubMed doi:10.1016/j.
apmr.2009.01.010
Kuehl, M.D., Snyder, A.R., Erickson, S.E., Valovich, M., &
Tamara, C. (2010). Impact of prior concussions on healthrelated quality of life in collegiate athletes. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 20, 86–91. PubMed doi:10.1097/
JSM.0b013e3181cf4534
Larkin, M., Watts, S., & Clifton, E. (2006). Giving voice
and making sense in interpretative phenomenological
analysis. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 3, 102–120.
doi:10.1191/1478088706qp062oa

McCrory, P. (2011). Sport concussion and the risk of chronic neurological impairment. Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine,
21, 6–12. PubMed doi:10.1097/JSM.0b013e318204db50
McCrory, P., Meeuwisse, W., Johnston, K., Dvorak, J., Aubry,
M., Molloy, M., & Cantu, R. (2009). Consensus statement
on concussion in sport: The 3rd international conference
on concussion in sport held in Zurich, November 2008.
British Journal of Sports Medicine, 43, i76–i84. PubMed
doi:10.1136/bjsm.2009.058248
McKnight, K., Bernes, K., Gunn, T., Chorney, D., Orr, D., &
Bardick, A. (2009). Life after sport: Athletic career termination and transferable skills. Journal of Excellence,
13, 63–77.
Melnick, M. (1992). Male athletes and sexual assault. Journal
of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 63, 32–35.
Messner, M. (1990). When bodies are weapons: Masculinity and
violence in sports. International Review for the Sociology
of Sport, 25, 203–220. doi:10.1177/101269029002500303
Mihovilovic, M. (1968). The status of former sportsmen.
International Review of Sport Sociology, 3, 73–96.
doi:10.1177/101269026800300105
Morra, N., & Smith, M.D. (1996). Interpersonal sources of
violence in hockey: The influence of the media, parents,
coaches, and game officials. In R.E. Smith & F. Smoll
(Eds.), Children and youth sport: A biopsychosocial
perspective (pp. 142–155). Madison, WI: Brown and
Benchmark.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Aldao, A. (2011). Gender and age differences in emotion regulation strategies and their relationship to depressive symptoms. Personality and Individual
Differences, 51, 704–708. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2011.06.012
Ogilvie, B.C., & Howe, M. (1982). Career crisis in sport. In T.
Orlick, J.T. Partington, & J.H. Salmela (Eds.), Proceedings of the 5th World Congress of Sport Psychology (pp.
176–183). Ottawa: Coaching Association of Canada.
Osborn, M., & Smith, J.A. (1998). The personal experience of
chronic benign lower back pain: An interpretative phenomenological analysis. British Journal of Health Psychology,
3, 65–83. doi:10.1111/j.2044-8287.1998.tb00556.x
Quinn, A.M., & Fallon, B.J. (1999). The changes in psychological characteristics and reactions of elite athletes from injury
onset until full recovery. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 11, 210–229. doi:10.1080/10413209908404201
Rees, T. (2007). Influence of social support on athletes. In S.
Jowett & D. Lavallee (Eds.), Social psychology in sport
(pp. 223–231). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Rees, T., & Hardy, L. (2000). An investigation of the social
support experiences of high-level sports performers. The
Sport Psychologist, 14, 327–347.
Safai, P. (2003). Healing the body in the “culture of risk”: Examining the negotiation of treatment between sport medicine
clinicians and injured athletes in Canadian intercollegiate
sport. Sociology of Sport Journal, 20, 127–146.
Smith, J.A. (2004). Reflecting on the development of interpretative phenomenological analysis and its contribution to
qualitative psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 1, 39–54 doi:10.1191/1478088704qp004oa.

Multiple Concussion Effects on Retired NHL Players   179

Smith, J.A., Flowers, P., & Larkin, M. (2009). Interpretative
phenomenological analysis: Theory, method, and research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stern, R.A., Riley, D.O., Daneshvar, D.H., Nowinski, C.J.,
Cantu, R.C., & McKee, A.C. (2011). Long-term consequences of repetitive brain trauma: Chronic traumatic
encephalopathy. Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation,
3, 460–467. doi:10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.08.008.
Tamminen, K.A., Holt, N.L., & Neely, K.C. (2013). Exploring
adversity and the potential for growth among elite female
athletes. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 14, 28–36.
doi:10.1016/j.psychsport.2012.07.002
Taylor, J., & Ogilvie, B.C. (1994). A conceptual model of adaptation to retirement among athletes. Journal of Applied Sport
Psychology, 6, 1–20. doi:10.1080/10413209408406462
Werthner, P., & Orlick, T. (1986). Retirement experiences of
successful Olympic athletes. International Journal of Sport
Psychology, 17, 337–363.

Weinstein, M.D., Smith, M.D., & Wiesenthal, D.L. (1995).
Masculinity and hockey violence. Sex Roles, 33, 831–847.
doi:10.1007/BF01544782
Wiese-Bjornstal, D.M., Smith, A.M., Shaffer, S.M., &
Morrey, M.A. (1998). An integrated model of response
to sport injury: Psychological and sociological dynamics. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 10, 46–69.
doi:10.1080/10413209808406377
Willig, C. (2001). Introducing qualitative research in psychology. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Yardley, L. (2008). Demonstrating validity in qualitative inquiry.
In J.A. Smith (Ed.), Qualitative psychology: A practical
guide to research methods (pp. 235–251). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Young, K., White, P., & McTeer, W. (1994). Body talk: Male
athletes reflect on sport, injury, and pain. Sociology of Sport
Journal, 11, 175–194.
Manuscript submitted: April 23, 2012
Revision accepted: December 19, 2012

