Leading Edge

Review
Origins and Mechanisms
of miRNAs and siRNAs
Richard W. Carthew1,* and Erik J. Sontheimer1,*
1Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Cell Biology, Northwestern University, 2205 Tech Drive, Evanston, IL 60208-3500, USA
*Correspondence: r-carthew@northwestern.edu (R.W.C.), erik@northwestern.edu (E.J.S.)
DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2009.01.035

Over the last decade, 20–30 nucleotide RNA molecules have emerged as critical regulators in the
expression and function of eukaryotic genomes. Two primary categories of these small RNAs—
short interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and microRNAs (miRNAs)—act in both somatic and germline lineages in a broad range of eukaryotic species to regulate endogenous genes and to defend the
genome from invasive nucleic acids. Recent advances have revealed unexpected diversity in their
biogenesis pathways and the regulatory mechanisms that they access. Our understanding of
siRNA- and miRNA-based regulation has direct implications for fundamental biology as well as
disease etiology and treatment.
In the last decade, few areas of biology have been transformed as
thoroughly as RNA molecular biology. This transformation has
occurred along many fronts, as detailed in this issue, but one of
the most significant advances has been the discovery of small
(20–30 nucleotide [nt]) noncoding RNAs that regulate genes
and genomes. This regulation can occur at some of the most
important levels of genome function, including chromatin structure, chromosome segregation, transcription, RNA processing,
RNA stability, and translation. The effects of small RNAs on
gene expression and control are generally inhibitory, and the corresponding regulatory mechanisms are therefore collectively
subsumed under the heading of RNA silencing. The central theme
that runs throughout is that the small RNAs serve as specificity
factors that direct bound effector proteins to target nucleic acid
molecules via base-pairing interactions. Invariably, the core
component of the effector machinery is a member of the Argonaute protein superfamily. Because the small RNAs render the
silencing machinery addressable in ways that can be predicted
and in some cases controlled, the associated pathways have
taken on great importance in practical and applied realms.
Although many classes of small RNAs have emerged, various
aspects of their origins, structures, associated effector proteins,
and biological roles have led to the general recognition of three
main categories: short interfering RNAs (siRNAs), microRNAs
(miRNAs), and piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs). These RNAs are
only known to be present in eukaryotes, although the Argonaute
proteins that function in eukaryotic silencing can also be found
in scattered bacterial and archaeal species. The boundaries
between the various small RNA classes are becoming increasingly difficult to discern as described in more detail below, but
nonetheless some distinctions persist. siRNAs and miRNAs
are the most broadly distributed in both phylogenetic and physiological terms and are characterized by the double-stranded
nature of their precursors. In contrast, piRNAs are primarily found
in animals, exert their functions most clearly in the germline, and
derive from precursors that are poorly understood but appear to
be single stranded (see Review by C.D. Malone and G. J. Hannon

642 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

on page 656 of this issue). Most definitively, piRNAs and si/
miRNAs associate with distinct subsets of effector proteins—
siRNAs and miRNAs bind to members of the Ago clade of Argonaute proteins, whereas piRNAs bind to members of the Piwi
clade.
This review will focus on siRNAs and miRNAs, with an
emphasis on their biogenesis and silencing mechanisms. We
will focus on developments over the last several years and will
rely upon prior reviews to provide the reader with references to
earlier discoveries in the field (also see Reviews in this issue by
O. Voinnet on page 669, about the biological processes that are
under siRNA and miRNA control in plants, and by C.D. Malone
and G. J. Hannon on page 656, about piRNAs, Piwi proteins,
and their roles in transposon control and genome defense). We
will begin with the core aspects of the siRNA and miRNA pathways that are shared by both and then will discuss their unique
features in turn.
siRNAs and miRNAs: Themes in Common
The first miRNA, lin-4 from Caenorhabditis elegans, was discovered by Ambros and coworkers in 1993 as an endogenous regulator of genes that control developmental timing (Bartel, 2004).
Five years later, Fire, Mello, and colleagues reported that exogenous double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) specifically silences genes
through a mechanism called RNA interference (RNAi) (Mello and
Conte, 2004). In 1999, silencing in plants was shown to be
accompanied by the appearance of 20–25 nt RNAs that match
the sequence of the silencing trigger (Tomari and Zamore, 2005).
Very shortly thereafter, the direct conversion of dsRNAs into
21–23 nt siRNAs was documented. In 2001, miRNAs were
found to comprise a broad class of small RNA regulators, with
at least dozens of representatives in each of several plant and
animal species (Bartel, 2004). By this point, the two categories
of small RNAs had become firmly embedded in our view of the
gene regulatory landscape: miRNAs, as regulators of endogenous genes, and siRNAs, as defenders of genome integrity in
response to foreign or invasive nucleic acids such as viruses,

transposons, and transgenes. Single-stranded forms of both
miRNAs and siRNAs were found to associate with effector
assemblies (Meister and Tuschl, 2004) known as RNA-induced
silencing complexes (RISCs) (Hammond et al., 2000). Both
siRNA- and miRNA-programmed forms of RISC (siRISC and
miRISC, respectively) were primarily associated with posttranscriptional modes of regulation, though this apparent limitation
would soon be breached, at least in the case of siRNAs (Lippman
and Martienssen, 2004).
In all cases, the identities of the genes to be silenced are specified by the small RNA component, which recognizes each target
by Watson-Crick base pairing. Accordingly, miRNA and siRNA
silencing is readily reprogrammable. When changing circumstances require different expression patterns of endogenous
genes, the silencing machinery can be redirected through the
expression of new miRNAs and the dilution or removal of old
ones. Similarly, when the genome faces new threats from novel
invaders, it can exploit the foreign sequences themselves by
co-opting them into the siRNA mechanism, thereby suppressing
expression from invasive genes and responding adaptively to
the threat.
Initially, miRNAs and siRNAs appeared to be distinguished in
two primary ways. First, miRNAs were viewed as endogenous
and purposefully expressed products of an organism’s own
genome, whereas siRNAs were thought to be primarily exogenous in origin, derived directly from the virus, transposon, or
transgene trigger. Second, miRNAs appeared to be processed
from stem-loop precursors with incomplete double-stranded
character, whereas siRNAs were found to be excised from
long, fully complementary double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs)
(Tomari and Zamore, 2005). Despite these differences, the
size similarities and sequence-specific inhibitory functions of
miRNAs and siRNAs immediately suggested relatedness in
biogenesis and mechanism. Sure enough, both classes of small
RNAs were quickly revealed to depend upon the same two families of proteins: Dicer enzymes to excise them from their precursors, and Ago proteins to support their silencing effector functions (Meister and Tuschl, 2004; Tomari and Zamore, 2005)
(Figure 1A). Thus, these three sets of macromolecules—Dicers,
Agos, and 21–23 nt duplex-derived RNAs—became recognized as the signature components of RNA silencing.
Dicer: A Portal into RNA Silencing
Because the double-stranded nature of miRNA and siRNA
precursors was evident, and because RNase III enzymes had
long been characterized as dsRNA-specific nucleases, enzymes
with RNase III domains were promptly recognized as primary
candidates in the search for miRNA/siRNA biogenesis factors,
and confirmation of this role came quickly (Meister and Tuschl,
2004; Tomari and Zamore, 2005). One class of large RNase III
enzymes is characterized by several domains in a specific order
from the amino-to-carboxy terminus: a DEXD/H ATPase domain,
a DUF283 domain, a PAZ domain, two tandem RNase III
domains, and a dsRNA-binding domain (dsRBD) (Figure 1B).
Some members of this family differ slightly from this arrangement,
for instance in the apparent lack of a functional ATPase domain or
PAZ domain or in the presence of anywhere from zero to two
C-terminal dsRBDs. C. elegans and D. melanogaster orthologs

of these proteins were shown to be required for RNAi and for
miRNA biogenesis and function (Meister and Tuschl, 2004; Tomari and Zamore, 2005), and the members of this protein family
came to be known as Dicer enzymes. Some organisms including
mammals and nematodes have only a single Dicer that does
double duty in the biogenesis of both miRNAs and siRNAs,
whereas other organisms divide the labor among multiple Dicer
proteins. For instance, Drosophila melanogaster expresses
two distinct Dicers, and Arabidopsis thaliana produces four. As
a general rule, organisms with multiple Dicers exhibit functional
specialization between them, as exemplified by the fruit fly:
Drosophila Dicer-1 is required for miRNA biogenesis, whereas
Dicer-2 is devoted mostly to the siRNA pathway (Tomari and
Zamore, 2005).
How do Dicer proteins work in dsRNA processing? Biochemical, genetic, and structural studies have converged on a model
in which the PAZ and RNase III domains play central roles in
excising siRNAs preferentially from ends of dsRNA molecules
(Zhang et al., 2004; Macrae et al., 2006). PAZ domains are shared
with Argonaute proteins (see below) and are specialized to bind
RNA ends, especially duplex ends with short (2 nt)
30 overhangs. An end engages the Dicer PAZ domain, and the
substrate dsRNA then extends approximately two helical turns
along the surface of the protein before it reaches a single processing center (Figure 1B). The center resides in a cleft of an
intramolecular dimer involving the RNase III domains. Each of
the two RNase III active sites cleaves one of the two strands,
leading to staggered duplex scission to generate new ends with
2 nt 30 overhangs. The reaction leaves a 50 monophosphate
on the product ends, consistent with a requirement for this group
during later stages of silencing (Tomari and Zamore, 2005). This
general model pertains equally to pre-miRNA stem-loop
substrates and to long, perfectly base-paired dsRNAs. In some
species, different functional categories of small RNAs exhibit
slightly different lengths, and, not surprisingly, this appears to
be dictated by the distance between the PAZ domain and the processing center in the relevant Dicer enzyme (Macrae et al., 2007).
The roles of the ATPase domain have proven enigmatic and
probably vary among different forms of Dicer. ATP promotes
dsRNA processing by Drosophila Dicer-2 and C. elegans Dcr-1,
and mutations predicted to cripple ATPase activity in Drosophila
Dicer-2 specifically abolish dsRNA processing (Tomari and
Zamore, 2005). In contrast, ATP is dispensable for dsRNA processing by human Dcr (hDcr), and an ATPase-defective mutant
exhibits no processing defect (Tomari and Zamore, 2005).
Recently, the ATPase domain of hDcr was shown to have an
autoinhibitory effect on dsRNA processing by diminishing the
enzyme’s catalytic efficiency (Ma et al., 2008). The roles of
dsRNA processing autoinhibition, the conditions under which
its regulatory potential might be used, and the basis for the
apparent differences in ATPase domain function among distinct
Dicers remain unknown.
Dicers isolated from their natural sources are generally found
in a heterodimeric complex with a protein that contains two or
three dsRBDs (Tomari and Zamore, 2005). Both hDcr and
Drosophila Dcr-2 process dsRNAs effectively in the absence of
the heterodimeric partner (TRBP and R2D2, respectively). In at
least some cases, the role of Dicer in silencing extends beyond

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 643

Figure 1. Core Features of miRNA and siRNA Silencing
(A) Common aspects of all miRNA and siRNA pathways. Double-stranded RNA precursors of various kinds are processed by a Dicer protein into short (20–30 nt)
fragments. One strand of the processed duplex is loaded into an Argonaute protein, enabling target RNA recognition through Watson-Crick base pairing. Once
the target is recognized, its expression is modulated by one of several distinct mechanisms, depending on the biological context.
(B) Dicer proteins cleave dsRNA precursors into characteristic lengths through the action of two RNase III domains. The domain arrangement of most Dicer
enzymes is shown at the top. Processing occurs most readily at dsRNA ends, which associate with the PAZ domain present in most Dicer enzymes. The substrate
is then positioned within the active sites of the RNase III domains, which cleave the 20–30 nt miRNA/siRNA duplex from its precursor. This model is supported by
the crystal structure of Giardia Dicer, shown with a dsRNA modeled into the structure (image kindly provided by J. Doudna). In addition to the canonical PAZ and
RNase III domains, the structure shows active-site metal ions (purple) and a ‘‘ruler’’ helix (red) that helps to specify the length of the siRNA product.
(C) Argonaute proteins are RNA silencing effectors that are guided to their targets by short single-stranded nucleic acids. The canonical arrangement of Ago
domains is given at the top. Below is a crystal structure of the Thermus thermophilus Ago protein, with a bound DNA guide strand base paired to an RNA target.
The 50 end of the guide strand associates with a binding pocket in the Mid domain, and the 30 end binds the PAZ domain. The target cleavage site is juxtaposed
with active-site residues in the PIWI domain, though in this case cleavage is suppressed by mismatches between the guide and the target. (Structure reprinted
with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.: Wang et al. [2008]. Nature 456, 921–926.)

dsRNA processing and into the pathway of RISC assembly, as
discussed in more detail below, and this activity is much more
dependent on the dsRBD partner protein.
Argonaute: At the Core of RNA Silencing
The Argonaute superfamily can be divided into three separate
subgroups: the Piwi clade that binds piRNAs, the Ago clade
that associates with miRNAs and siRNAs, and a third clade
that has only been described thus far in nematodes (Yigit et al.,
2006). All gene-regulatory phenomena involving 20–30 nt
RNAs are thought to require one or more Argonaute proteins,
and these proteins are the central, defining components of the
various forms of RISC. The double-stranded products of Dicer

644 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

enter into a RISC assembly pathway that involves duplex
unwinding, culminating in the stable association of only one of
the two strands with the Ago effector protein (Meister and
Tuschl, 2004; Tomari and Zamore, 2005). This guide strand
directs target recognition by Watson-Crick base pairing,
whereas the other strand of the original small RNA duplex (the
passenger strand) is discarded.
Argonaute proteins are defined by the presence of four
domains: the PAZ domain (shared with Dicer enzymes), the
PIWI domain that is unique to the Argonaute superfamily, and
the N and Mid domains (Figure 1C). Crystallographic studies of
bacterial and archaeal Argonaute proteins have greatly illuminated many aspects of Argonaute function (Parker et al., 2004,

Figure 2. A Diversity of siRNA Sources
Several different categories of transcripts can
adopt dsRNA structures that can be processed
by Dicer into siRNAs. These duplexes can be intraor intermolecular, and although most are perfectly
base paired, some (e.g., hairpin RNAs and gene/
pseudogene duplexes) are not. An siRNA consists
of a guide strand (red), which assembles into
functional siRISC, and a passenger strand (blue),
which is ejected and degraded. All forms of siRISC
contain the siRNA bound to an Ago protein, and
many if not most forms of siRISC contain additional factors. Target RNAs are then recognized
by base pairing, and silencing ensues through
one of several mechanisms. In many species, the
siRNA populations that engage a target can be
amplified by the action of RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RdRP) enzymes, strengthening and
perpetuating the silencing response.

2005; Song et al., 2004; Ma et al., 2005; Yuan et al., 2005). These
structural studies have recently been extended to Thermus thermophilus Argonaute loaded with a guide nucleic acid (in this
case, a short DNA molecule), with and without a base-paired
target RNA (Figure 1C) (Wang et al., 2008b, 2008c). The overall
protein structure is bilobed, with one lobe consisting of the
PAZ domain and the other lobe consisting of the PIWI domain
flanked by N-terminal (N) and middle (Mid) domains. The Argonaute PAZ domain has RNA 30 terminus binding activity, and
the co-crystal structures reveal that this function is used in guide
strand binding. The other end of the guide strand engages a 50 phosphate binding pocket in the Mid domain, and the remainder
of the guide tracks along a positively charged surface to which
each of the domains contributes. The protein-DNA contacts
are dominated by sugar-phosphate backbone interactions, as
expected for a protein that can accommodate a wide range of
guide sequences. Guide strand nucleotides 2–6, which are especially important for target recognition, are stacked with their Watson-Crick faces exposed and available for base pairing.
A critical breakthrough was the demonstration that the PIWI
domain adopts an RNase H-like fold that in some cases can catalyze guide strand-dependent endonucleolytic cleavage of a basepaired target (Parker et al., 2004; Song et al., 2004). This initial cut
represents the critical first step in a subset of small RNA silencing
events that proceed through RNA destabilization. Not all Argonaute proteins have endonucleolytic activity, and those that

lack it usually also lack critical active-site
residues that coordinate a presumptive
catalytic metal ion. The protein structures
have been less informative thus far in
explaining nonendonucleolytic modes of
silencing, which is not surprising given
the substantial roster of other factors
that are necessary in those cases.
Although some species such as Schizosaccharomyces pombe express only
a single Argonaute protein, most contain
multiple Argonaute genes. For example,
five, eight, and 27 paralogs exist in Drosophila, humans, and
C. elegans, respectively. Functional specialization (for instance,
between siRNA and miRNA silencing) is very clear in plants, flies,
and worms, even among members of the same clade (e.g., Yigit
et al., 2006). In humans, four of the eight proteins are from the Ago
clade and associate with both siRNAs and miRNAs (Meister and
Tuschl, 2004; Tomari and Zamore, 2005), but little difference has
been reported thus far in the populations of small RNAs that they
bind, so the degree of functional specialization in mammals
remains unclear.
siRNAs
Sources of siRNA Precursors
The canonical inducer of RNAi is long, linear, perfectly basepaired dsRNA, introduced directly into the cytoplasm or taken
up from the environment (Mello and Conte, 2004). These dsRNAs
are processed by Dicer into the siRNAs that direct silencing
(Meister and Tuschl, 2004; Tomari and Zamore, 2005). siRNAs
were originally observed during transgene- and virus-induced
silencing in plants (Mello and Conte, 2004), consistent with
a natural role in genome defense (Figure 2). In 2002 and 2003,
centromeres, transposons, and other repetitive sequences
were uncovered as another wellspring of siRNAs (Lippman and
Martienssen, 2004). Shortly thereafter, functional studies in
plants led to the discovery of trans-acting siRNAs (ta-siRNAs)
that are diced from specific genomic transcripts and regulate

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 645

discrete sets of target genes (Vazquez et al., 2004; Allen et al.,
2005). More recently, other sources of endogenous siRNAs
(endo-siRNAs) have been identified (Golden et al., 2008, and
references therein). These include convergent mRNA transcripts
and other natural sense-antisense pairs, duplexes involving
pseudogene-derived antisense transcripts and the sense
mRNAs from their cognate genes, and hairpin RNAs (hpRNAs).
Thus, it has become clear that siRNAs are not solely the products
of foreign nucleic acid but arise from endogenous genomic loci
as well (Figure 2). As such, they differ from many exogenous
siRNAs (exo-siRNAs) in that they or their precursors have an
obligate nuclear phase.
RISC Assembly and siRNA Strand Selection
Although single-stranded siRNAs can load directly into purified
Argonaute proteins (Rivas et al., 2005), the double-stranded siRNAs that are generated by Dicer cannot and rely instead upon
siRISC assembly pathways (Figure 2). These pathways have
been best characterized in Drosophila and in humans. siRISC
assembly in Drosophila is nucleated by the R2D2/Dicer-2 heterodimer, which binds an siRNA duplex (Tomari and Zamore,
2005) and then progresses by the addition of unknown factors
to form the RISC-loading complex (RLC). The RLC then assembles into pre-RISC, with the siRNA still in duplex form (Kim et al.,
2007). pre-RISC formation is the first step that requires Ago2, the
Drosophila Ago protein that is primarily dedicated to the siRNA
pathway. Ago2 then cleaves the passenger strand (Matranga
et al., 2005; Miyoshi et al., 2005; Rand et al., 2005), leading to
its ejection and the conversion of the entire assembly into the
80S holo-RISC (Tomari and Zamore, 2005). Smaller forms of
cleavage-competent Drosophila siRISC have also been reported
(Tomari and Zamore, 2005). RISC assembly in humans has also
been characterized biochemically and appears to be a simpler
process. Three proteins—Dicer, TRBP, and Ago-2—associate
with each other even in the absence of the dsRNA trigger (Gregory et al., 2005; Maniataki and Mourelatos, 2005). This trimer,
also referred to as the RISC-loading complex, is capable of
binding dsRNA, dicing it into an siRNA, loading the siRNA into
Ago-2, and discarding the passenger strand to generate functional RISC (Macrae et al., 2008). Additional proteins associate
with Ago complexes from human cells (Meister et al., 2005;
Hock et al., 2007; Landthaler et al., 2008), but they do not appear
to be essential for RISC loading or target cleavage. Surprisingly,
mouse cells carrying a null allele of Dicer can still assemble
siRNAs into functional RISCs (Kanellopoulou et al., 2005; Murchison et al., 2005), indicating that Dicer is not required for RISC
loading in mammals.
The double-stranded nature of Dicer products contrasts with
the single guide strand that eventually finds its way into functional RISC (Figure 2). Strand selection does not require or
involve the presence of a cognate mRNA target, as preformed
RISC programmed to cleave a heterologous target can do so
when the target is added later. In vitro and in vivo experiments
revealed that strand selection is dictated by the relative thermodynamic stabilities of the two duplex ends: whichever strand has
its 50 terminus at the less stably base-paired end will be favored
as the guide strand (Tomari and Zamore, 2005). This thermodynamic asymmetry is graded rather than all-or-none, and siRNAs
with equal base-pairing stabilities at their ends will incorporate

646 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

either strand into RISC with approximately equal frequency. In
Drosophila, the R2D2/Dicer-2 heterodimer appears to sense
siRNA asymmetry during the earliest phase of RISC assembly
(Tomari and Zamore, 2005). In contrast, Dicer null mouse cells
exhibit no obvious deficit in siRNA loading (Kanellopoulou
et al., 2005; Murchison et al., 2005), so the mechanism of strand
selection is unclear in mammals.
Different categories of siRNAs can depend upon different
proteins for their function, indicating that they rely on different
biogenesis and RISC assembly pathways. This is particularly
true in plants, where viral siRNAs, transgene siRNAs, and
tasiRNAs have highly distinct cofactor requirements. This theme
has recently been extended to animals with the observation that
Drosophila Dicer-2 relies upon different dsRBD proteins for
endo- and exo-siRNAs (Golden et al., 2008). Although Dicer2’s partnership with R2D2 has been well established for exosiRNAs (Tomari and Zamore, 2005), R2D2 depletion has little
effect on the accumulation and function of most endo-siRNAs.
Instead, endo-siRNAs depend upon Loquacious (Loqs), which
had previously been characterized as a Dicer-1 partner that
functions primarily in the miRNA pathway (Forstemann et al.,
2005; Jiang et al., 2005; Saito et al., 2005). The mechanistic basis
for the differential Loqs or R2D2 requirement with endo-siRNAs,
exo-siRNAs, and miRNAs is not known, but it is one of a growing
number of examples of blurred functional boundaries between
different categories of small silencing RNAs.
Posttranscriptional Silencing by siRNAs
During the canonical RNAi pathway, the siRNA guide strand
directs RISC to perfectly complementary RNA targets, which
are then degraded. RNA degradation is induced by the PIWI
domain of the Ago protein (Figure 3, lower right). This ‘‘slicer’’
activity is very precise: the phosphodiester linkage between
the target nucleotides that are base paired to siRNA residues
10 and 11 (counting from the 50 end) is cleaved to generate products with 50 -monophosphate and 30 -hydroxyl termini (Tomari
and Zamore, 2005). Once this initial cut is made, cellular exonucleases attack the fragments to complete the degradative
process (Orban and Izaurralde, 2005). The newly generated 30
end of RISC cleavage products is also a substrate for oligouridylation, which can promote exonucleolytic targeting (Shen and
Goodman, 2004). The target dissociates from the siRNA after
cleavage, freeing RISC to cleave additional targets. In some
cases, highly purified forms of RISC fail to cleave their targets
with multiple turnover (Rivas et al., 2005; Förstemann et al.,
2007), suggesting that extrinsic factors promote product
release, which is likely to be driven by ATP hydrolysis (Tomari
and Zamore, 2005).
Mismatches at or near the center of the siRNA/target duplex
suppress endonucleolytic cleavage; furthermore, some siRNAprogrammed Ago proteins lack endonuclease activity even
with perfectly paired targets (Tomari and Zamore, 2005). Nonetheless, targets that are partially mismatched or are recognized
by endonuclease-inactive siRISCs can still be silenced at a posttranscriptional level. In such cases, silencing can involve translational repression or exonucleolytic degradation in a manner
similar to miRNA silencing (Figure 3, upper right), as discussed
in detail below. In mammalian cells, siRNAs specifically designed
to engage targets with imperfect complementarity are virtually

Figure 3. Mechanisms of siRNA Silencing
During canonical RNAi (lower right), siRISC recognizes a perfectly complementary mRNA, leading to
Ago-catalyzed mRNA cleavage at a single site
within the duplex. After cleavage, functional siRISC
is regenerated, whereas the mRNA fragments are
further degraded. siRNAs are also capable of
recognizing targets with imperfect complementarity (upper right). In some cases, they can silence
targets by miRNA-like mechanisms involving
translational repression and exonucleolytic degradation, though the frequency with which natural
siRNAs use these pathways is not clear. Finally,
siRISC can direct heterochromatin formation (left)
by associating with nascent transcripts and RNA
polymerases (RNA Pol II in S. pombe and RNA
Pol IV/V in A. thaliana). In plants, target engagement
leads to the association or activation of a DNA
methyltransferase (DMT) that methylates the DNA
(lower left), leading to heterochromatin formation.
In S. pombe and probably in animals (upper left),
the pathway involves a histone methyltransferase
(HMT) that methylates Lys9 of histone H3 (data
not shown), thereby inducing heterochromatinization. In most eukaryotes other than insects and
mammals, target recognition by siRISC induces
the synthesis of secondary dsRNAs and siRNAs
by RdRP enzymes (lower middle). The secondary
dsRNAs are processed by Dicer into siRNAs, which
add to the pool of siRISC. In nematodes, many of
the secondary siRNAs arise as single-stranded,
unprimed transcripts with 50 -triphosphates and
do not require Dicer processing.

indistinguishable from miRNAs in their silencing effects.
Silencing of imperfectly matched mRNAs in a miRNA-like fashion
appears to account for most ‘‘off-target’’ effects of siRNAs and is
therefore of considerable practical importance. The extent to
which natural endo-siRNAs silence imperfectly matched targets
is not known, but it would be surprising if this regulatory potential
were not tapped with some frequency.
Effector phases of posttranscriptional siRNA silencing are
thought to occur primarily in the cytoplasm. siRNA binding
induces the localization of Ago proteins into subcellular foci called
P bodies (Liu et al., 2005b) that are enriched in mRNA degradation
factors. However, P body localization does not appear to be
strictly required for RNAi (Chu and Rana, 2006), and the nuclear
environment is also amenable to RNAi (Robb et al., 2005). The
recent application of fluorescence correlation and crosscorrelation spectroscopic approaches has led to the direct observation
of a nuclear RISC that is much smaller than its cytoplasmic counterpart (Ohrt et al., 2008). A genetic screen for factors required for
nuclear RNAi in C. elegans identified the Ago protein Nrde-3,
which was found to reside in the cytoplasm until the induction
of nuclear translocation by siRNA binding (Guang et al., 2008).
These observations indicate that the localization of RNAi factors
is dynamic and that the silencing machinery can be broadly
distributed within the confines of the cell.
Priming the Pump: siRNA Amplification
One of the most striking features of RNAi is its potency: only
a few molecules of dsRNA per cell can induce a robust response
(Mello and Conte, 2004). In some organisms, such as C. elegans,

the primary dsRNA trigger induces synthesis of secondary
siRNAs (if the target mRNA is present) (Figure 3, bottom) through
the action of RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) enzymes
(Meister and Tuschl, 2004). This secondary pool of siRNAs can
greatly amplify and sustain the response, and in some organisms, such as plants and nematodes, they can lead to systemic
silencing that spreads throughout the organism. Recognizable
RdRP-encoding genes are present in the genomes of many
RNAi-competent eukaryotes, with the notable exceptions of
insect and vertebrate species. One functional consequence of
siRNA amplification by RdRPs is known as transitive RNAi and
involves the appearance of siRNAs corresponding to regions of
the mRNA that were not targeted by the initial dsRNA trigger.
This can in turn lead to the silencing of multiple transcripts, especially if they share a highly conserved sequence or a common
exon. The apparent lack of transitive RNAi in vertebrates and
insects has a positive effect on its specificity and allows the targeting of individual alternatively spliced mRNA isoforms from
a common locus.
Secondary siRNAs have been cataloged most extensively in
worms (Pak and Fire, 2007; Sijen et al., 2007), and their characterization led to some surprises. First, nearly all of them correspond
to the antisense strand of the mRNA targeted by the primary
dsRNA trigger. This would be difficult to rationalize if the
secondary siRNAs were generated through a dsRNA intermediate
that is processed by Dicer, since thermodynamic siRNA asymmetry would then lead to a mixture of sense and antisense guide
strands. Second, they carry di- or triphosphate groups at their

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 647

50 termini, indicating that they are likely to be primary, unprimed
RdRP products, again consistent with a lack of processing by
Dicer. Thus, it appears that not all siRNAs are directly generated
from double-stranded precursors. It is possible that secondary
siRNAs bypass the RISC assembly pathway that is followed by
primary siRNAs and instead load directly into Ago proteins.
siRNAs Can Induce Heterochromatin Formation
siRNAs are not restricted to posttranscriptional modes of repression. In 2002, siRNAs were shown to induce heterochromatin
formation in S. pombe, consistent with earlier reports of transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) in plants (Lippman and
Martienssen, 2004). Direct links between RNA silencing and
heterochromatin were quickly established in animals, plants,
and ciliates as well. The process has been best characterized
in S. pombe. The Ago1-containing effector in fission yeast is
referred to as the RNA-induced transcriptional silencing (RITS)
complex and is guided to specific chromosomal loci such as
centromeric repeats by its bound siRNAs (Figure 3, left). Current
models involve siRNA recognition of nascent transcripts (Bühler
et al., 2006), facilitated by direct interaction between RITS and
RNA polymerase II (Djupedal et al., 2005; Kato et al., 2005).
RITS association promotes histone H3 methylation on lysine
9 (H3K9) by the histone methyltransferases (HMTs), leading
to the recruitment of the chromodomain-containing protein
Swi6 and subsequent chromatin compaction (Lippman and
Martienssen, 2004) (Figure 3, upper left). Engagement of nascent
transcripts by RITS also activates the RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase complex (RDRC) that uses its RdRP subunit
(Rdp1) to generate secondary siRNAs (Sugiyama et al., 2005)
that reinforce and spread silencing (Figure 3, left and bottom).
TGS has also been extensively investigated in plants and
exhibits many similarities with the process in fission yeast. Key
differences also exist, however, prominent among them the
direct methylation of DNA by DNA methyltransferases (DMTs)
in addition to histone methylation (Lippman and Martienssen,
2004) (Figure 3, left) and the involvement of dedicated DNAdependent RNA polymerases, RNA Pol IV and Pol V, in the
synthesis of siRNA precursors (Herr et al., 2005; Onodera
et al., 2005; Wierzbicki et al., 2008). siRNA-directed transcriptional silencing is a fascinating and fast-moving field that has
recently been reviewed in depth elsewhere (Grewal and Elgin,
2007; Henderson and Jacobsen, 2007; Moazed, 2009).
MicroRNAs
Although we had learned a great deal about miRNAs by middecade (Bartel, 2004; Kim, 2005), the past few years have seen
some surprising new discoveries. Far from following a few simple
rules of production and action, miRNAs show diverse features
that are defying simple classification. Diversification is a key
feature of life processes, and miRNAs are no exception.
MicroRNA Biogenesis
MicroRNAs are found in the plant and animal branches of Eukaryota and are encoded by a bewildering array of genes. Transcription of miRNAs is typically performed by RNA polymerase II,
and transcripts are capped and polyadenylated (Kim, 2005).
Although some animal miRNAs are individually produced from
separate transcription units, many more miRNAs are produced
from transcription units that make more than one product (Bartel,

648 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

2004). A transcript may encode clusters of distinct miRNAs, or it
may encode a miRNA and protein. The latter type of transcript is
organized such that the miRNA sequence is located within an
intron. Many new animal miRNAs are thought to arise from accumulation of nucleotide sequence changes and not from gene
duplication (Lu et al., 2008). If the new miRNA sequence should
appear within an existing transcription unit, it immediately
expresses its new product without invention or duplication of
enhancers and promoters. This enables new miRNA genes to
more easily appear without gene duplication and may account
for the abundance of miRNA genes with multiple products.
The resulting primary or pri-miRNA transcript extends both
50 and 30 from the miRNA sequence, and two sequential processing reactions trim the transcript into the mature miRNA (Figure 4).
Processing depends on the miRNA sequence folding into a stemloop structure. A typical animal pri-miRNA consists of an imperfectly paired stem of 33 bp, with a terminal loop and flanking
segments (Bartel, 2004). The first processing step, which occurs
in the nucleus, excises the stem-loop from the remainder of the
transcript to create a pre-miRNA product. For most pri-miRNAs,
a nuclear member of the RNase III family (Dcl1 in plants and
Drosha in animals) carries out this cleavage reaction (Kim,
2005). Although Drosha catalyzes pri-miRNA processing (Lee
et al., 2003), it depends upon a protein cofactor for efficient and
precise processing. This cofactor contains two dsRBD domains
and stably associates with the ribonuclease to form the Microprocessor complex (Denli et al., 2004). However, Microprocessormediated cleavage is not the only way to produce pre-miRNAs
in animals. An alternative pathway uses splicing of pri-miRNA
transcripts to liberate introns that precisely mimic the structural
features of pre-miRNAs (Okamura et al., 2007; Ruby et al.,
2007). These mirtrons then enter the miRNA processing pathway
without the aid of the Microprocessor. Mirtrons are not common,
but they are found throughout the animal kingdom.
The second processing step excises the terminal loop from the
pre-miRNA stem to create a mature miRNA duplex of approximately 22 bp length (Bartel, 2004). In plants, Dcl1 carries out
this reaction in the nucleus. In animals, the pre-miRNA is first
exported from the nucleus, and the canonical Dicer enzyme
carries out the cleavage reaction in the cytoplasm (Kim, 2005).
One of the key differences between miRNAs and most siRNAs
is in the precision of their ends. MicroRNAs behave like traditional
polymeric products of gene activity, such that most species of
a miRNA have highly exact ends, although there is a little variation. In contrast, siRNAs tend to be much more heterogeneous
in end composition. It is this feature of miRNAs that has probably
allowed them to interact with greater specificity on substrate
mRNAs without a need for stringent complementarity or large
overlap. Consequently, the processing machinery is constructed
to produce miRNA duplexes with highly exact ends. The first cut
is most critical. Drosha carries this out with the aid of its dsRBD
domain binding partner protein, called DGCR8 in mammals.
DGCR8 directly interacts with the pri-miRNA stem and flanking
single-stranded segments (Han et al., 2006). Indeed, the flanking
segments are critical for processing since the cleavage site is
determined by the distance from the stem-flank junction. This
distance is precisely one turn of a dsRNA helix (11 bp) and is
the minimal processing length for an RNase III enzyme. Although

Figure 4. Biogenesis of miRNAs and
Assembly into miRISC in Plants and Animals
Nuclear transcription leads to capped and polyadenylated pri-miRNAs. In plants, Dcl1 processes the
RNA in succession. The order of processing is not
certain. The terminal loop may first be excised or
it might be the flanking segments that are cleaved
first. The second processing step by Dcl1 yields
a mature miRNA/miRNA* duplex that becomes
methylated and exported from the nucleus. In
animals, the pri-miRNA is processed by Drosha
with the aid of DGCR8 to generate a pre-miRNA
species. This is exported from the nucleus and processed by Dicer to form the mature miRNA/miRNA*
duplex. After processing, miRNAs are assembled
into miRISC. Only one strand of the duplex is stably
associated with an miRISC complex—the miRNA
strand is usually more strongly favored than the
miRISC* strand, although there are exceptions.

Drosha carries out the cleavage reaction, it is not sufficient to
directly bind the pri-miRNA. Instead, Drosha relies upon
DGCR8 to serve as a molecular anchor that properly positions
Drosha’s catalytic site the correct distance from the stem-flank
junction. Thus, the endpoint of the stem is a critical determinant
for one end of the mature miRNA.
The second cut performed by Dicer defines the other end of
the mature miRNA. Dicer will cleave anywhere along a dsRNA
molecule, but it has strong preference for the terminus (Kim,
2005; Vermeulen et al., 2005). The PAZ domain of Dicer interacts
with the 30 overhang at the terminus and determines the cleavage
site in a ruler-like fashion. The RNase III catalytic sites are positioned two helical turns or 22 bp away from the terminus/PAZ
portion of the Dicer-RNA complex.
Interestingly, the Drosha-Dicer double measure is not the only
mechanism to produce RNAs with miRNA-like end fidelity. The
ACA45 small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) is a double-hairpin RNA
that can be processed by Dicer to generate a 20–22 nt product
(Ender et al., 2008). This becomes associated with Ago and
exerts miRNA-like repression on an endogenous target gene. It
will be interesting to see how many other noncoding RNAs can
perform such dual functions.
Regulation of miRNA biogenesis is clearly an important issue
but has not been extensively studied. However, an interesting
trend has emerged. A surprising number of miRNA genes are
formed under the control of the very targets that they regulate.
For example, transcription of the Drosophila miR-7 gene is
repressed by an ETS domain transcription factor called Yan (Li
and Carthew, 2005). However, translation of Yan is repressed
by miR-7, thus forming a double-negative feedback loop.
Another example of a double-negative feedback loop involves
posttranscriptional regulation of miRNA biogenesis. In C. elegans,
the let-7 miRNA inhibits translation of Lin28, and let-7 in turn is

inhibited by Lin28 protein (Seggerson
et al., 2002). Recently, a mechanism for
Lin28 action has been described. The
Lin28 protein specifically associates with
both pri-let-7 and pre-let-7 RNAs (Heo
et al., 2008; Newman et al., 2008; Rybak et al., 2008). Sequences
in the terminal loop that are unique to let-7 appear to be required
for association (Newman et al., 2008). Lin28 is weakly localized in
the nucleus and strongly localized in the cytoplasm, and indeed it
affects both nuclear and cytoplasmic processing of let-7. Droshamediated cleavage is inhibited by Lin28 (Heo et al., 2008;
Newman et al., 2008; Viswanathan et al., 2008), as is Dicer-mediated cleavage (Heo et al., 2008; Rybak et al., 2008). In addition,
Lin28 promotes polyuridylation of the 30 terminus of pre-let-7
(Heo et al., 2008). Polyuridylated pre-let-7 is highly resistant to
cleavage by Dicer, suggesting a possible mechanism by which
Lin28 inhibits processing. Alternatively, polyuridylation might
occur on lingering pre-let-7 RNAs that are unable to be cleaved
by Dicer because of Lin28.
A rationale behind these double-negative regulatory relationships is that tight regulation of miRNA biogenesis is crucial.
Misexpression of miRNAs frequently mimics loss-of-function
phenotypes for their targets. This would be prevented if biogenesis of an miRNA is strictly controlled by its targets. The restriction would also explain how off-targeting effects by wayward
miRNAs are carefully limited.
MicroRNA Associations
The mature miRNA duplex is a short-lived entity; it is rapidly
unwound when it associates with an Ago protein. As with
siRNAs, miRNA unwinding is accompanied by differential strand
retention; one strand is retained while the other strand is lost. As
with siRNAs, strand retention is based on the relative thermodynamic stability of the duplex’s ends. The 50 terminus of the
retained strand is at the less stably base-paired end of the duplex
(Kim, 2005). However, this rule is not absolute. The other strand
is appreciably detected in Ago complexes, lending ambiguity to
the notion of strand asymmetry (Okamura et al., 2008). Although
either strand can become stably associated with Ago proteins,

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 649

the more commonly associated strand is called the miRNA
strand; the other strand is called the miRNA* strand. miRNA
unwinding is still a mysterious process that is not accompanied
by cleavage of the ejected strand by the associated Ago, in
contrast to the siRNA unwinding mechanism. This may be
because of the multiple bulges and mismatches typical of miRNA
duplexes, which presumably block cleavage by Ago (Matranga
et al., 2005).
One reason unwinding occurs so rapidly after duplex formation is that the two processes are physically coupled due to
Ago2’s presence in a complex with Dicer and TRBP. Such
a trimeric complex is capable of generating mature duplexes
from pre-miRNAs and transferring one strand to Ago2 (Gregory
et al., 2005; Maniataki and Mourelatos, 2005; Macrae et al.,
2008). In Drosophila, the situation is more complicated, owing
to the partitioning of siRNAs and miRNAs into different Ago
complexes. As in mammals, Ago loading is highly dependent
upon Dicer and its partner. However, partitioning is not absolute
since small RNA processing is not physically coupled to an Ago.
Processing of pre-miRNAs is performed by Dicer-1 and its
partner Loquacious, whereas Dicer-2 and its partner R2D2
generate siRNAs. Although Dicer-2/R2D2 load siRNAs with their
cognate Ago protein (Ago2), they do so without stably associating with Ago2 (Tomari and Zamore, 2005). Dicer-2/R2D2
tend not to bind miRNA duplexes and load them into Ago2
because of the central mismatches often found in miRNAs
(Tomari et al., 2007). Instead, an independent mechanism loads
miRNAs with their cognate Ago protein, Ago1.
The mammalian Dicer/Ago/miRNA complex is associated with
other proteins. Gemin3, Gemin4, Mov10, and Imp8 associate
with Ago2 (Bartel, 2004; Meister et al., 2005; Weinmann et al.,
2009). The mammalian protein GW182 also associates with
Ago2 (Liu et al., 2005a; Meister et al., 2005; Till et al., 2007). In
Drosophila, the ortholog of GW182 associates with the miRNA
effector Ago1 (Behm-Ansmant et al., 2006). Functional analysis
in humans, C. elegans, and Drosophila indicates that GW182 is
both necessary and sufficient for miRNA-bound Ago to silence
gene expression (Jakymiw et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2005a; Eulalio
et al., 2008; Ding and Grosshans, 2009). Thus, miRNA-bound
Ago in association with GW182 can be thought of as the miRISC
complex.
Posttranscriptional Repression by miRNAs
The miRNA acts as an adaptor for miRISC to specifically recognize and regulate particular mRNAs. If miRISC is tethered to
a heterologous RNA recognition factor, the factor enables
miRISC to recognize and repress mRNAs that lack miRNAbinding sites (Pillai et al., 2004). With few exceptions, miRNAbinding sites in animal mRNAs lie in the 30 UTR and are usually
present in multiple copies. Most animal miRNAs bind with
mismatches and bulges, although a key feature of recognition
involves Watson-Crick base pairing of miRNA nucleotides 2–8,
representing the seed region. In contrast, most plant miRNAs
bind with near-perfect complementarity to sites within the coding
sequence of their targets.
The degree of miRNA-mRNA complementarity has been
considered a key determinant of the regulatory mechanism.
Perfect complementarity allows Ago-catalyzed cleavage of the
mRNA strand, whereas central mismatches exclude cleavage

650 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

and promote repression of mRNA translation. It has been thought
that perfect complementarity excludes translational repression
because it enables cleavage, and it has contributed to the notion
that plant and animal miRNAs act in fundamentally different ways.
However, genetic analysis has recently upset the applecart.
In Arabidopsis, two mutants have normal miRNA-directed
cleavage but exhibit a defect in miRNA-directed translation
repression (Brodersen et al., 2008). The defective translational
repression is widespread and irrespective of the degree of
complementarity or location of target sites within mRNAs. This
suggests that translational repression is the default mechanism
by which miRNAs repress gene expression, both in animals and
plants. Perfectly complementary miRNAs may additionally
engage in mRNA cleavage such that their effects are a result of
both mechanisms.
The mechanisms by which miRISC regulates translation have
been subject to ongoing debate. The fundamental issue of
whether repression occurs at translation initiation or postinitiation has not yet been resolved. Initiation begins with the recognition of the mRNA 50 terminal cap by eIF4E, a subunit of the eIF4F
complex. This complex also contains eIF4A and eIF4G. Interaction of eIF4G with another initiation factor, eIF3, recruits the 40S
ribosomal subunit to the 50 end. The 40S preinitiation complex
joins with the 60S ribosomal subunit at the AUG codon to begin
elongation. eIF4G also interacts with the polyA-binding protein
PABP1 that decorates the 30 end of the message. The ability of
eIF4G to interact simultaneously with eIF4E and PABP1 effectively circularizes the mRNA molecule. This circularization
greatly enhances translation efficiency, especially under circumstances where mRNAs are abundant. Some viral mRNAs initiate
translation without any initiation factors or they require only
a subset of initiation factors due to the presence of an internal
ribosome entry site (IRES).
The issue of initiation versus postinitiation responsiveness to
miRISC has been judged in two ways. One criterion has been
whether density gradient centrifugation shows repressed
mRNAs located in the free mRNP pool (repressed initiation) or
in large polysomes (repressed elongation or termination). A
second criterion has been whether repressed mRNAs that
contain an IRES are resistant to repression. On the basis of these
criteria, some studies have found evidence for miRISCrepressed initiation (Humphreys et al., 2005; Pillai et al., 2005;
Kiriakidou et al., 2007; Mathonnet et al., 2007; Wakiyama et al.,
2007; Ding and Grosshans, 2009). Other studies have found
evidence for repression of postinitiation processes (Seggerson
et al., 2002; Maroney et al., 2006; Nottrott et al., 2006; Petersen
et al., 2006). There are no simple technical or experimental
explanations to account for the discrepancy. Rather, the inconsistencies suggest that repression may be exerted either at the
initiation step or at some subsequent stage. Divergent results
might be explained by different steps limiting overall translation
in the various experimental systems.
Petersen et al. (2006) suggest a possible means by which miRISC
represses elongation. A repressed mRNA can be associated with
polysomes, but when translation initiation is rapidly blocked with
hippuristanol, then ribosomes rapidly dissociate in a miRNAdependent manner. Their results suggest that miRISC promotes
premature ribosome dissociation from mRNAs (Figure 5).

Figure 5. Possible Mechanisms of miRISC-Mediated Repression
Nonrepressed mRNAs recruit initiation factors and ribosomal subunits and form circularized structures that enhance translation (top). When miRISCs bind to
mRNAs, they can repress initiation at the cap recognition stage (upper left) or the 60S recruitment stage (lower left). Alternatively, they can induce deadenylation
of the mRNA and thereby inhibit circularization of the mRNA (bottom). They can also repress a postinitiation stage of translation by inducing ribosomes to drop off
prematurely (lower right). Finally, they can promote mRNA degradation by inducing deadenylation followed by decapping.

Cell-free systems have been crucial in providing insights into
how miRISC represses initiation, but even these studies are
controversial. Currently, there are three competing models for
how miRISC represses initiation, and each is fundamentally
different from the others (Figure 5). One model proposes that
there is competition between miRISC and eIF4E for binding to
the mRNA 50 cap structure. eIF4E binds to the cap in part by
stacking the methylated base of the cap between two tryptophan residues. If miRISC competes with eIF4E, then one prediction is that providing excess eIF4F complex (containing eIF4E)
would alleviate repression. This indeed is the case when purified
eIF4F is added to an ascites cell-free system (Mathonnet et al.,
2007). Additional support comes from Drosophila embryo
lysates, where miRISC inhibits loading of the 40S preinitiation
complex onto mRNA (Thermann and Hentze, 2007). One
possible means by which miRISC competes with eIF4E has
been proposed. The Mid domain of human Ago2 has been
proposed to resemble eIF4E, with two phenylalanine residues
in the Mid sequence adopting equivalent positions to the eIF4E
tryptophans (Kiriakidou et al., 2007). Mutation of the phenylala-

nines impairs the ability of Ago2 to repress translation and bind
to m7GTP-coupled beads in vitro. Hence, it was speculated
that Ago2 itself competes with eIF4E for cap binding.
This proposal has been challenged by other studies in
Drosophila. Human Ago2 is not the only Ago protein to contain
these important residues; indeed, they are found in Ago family
members throughout the animal kingdom. The Drosophila
Ago1 Mid domain contains the phenylalanines, and mutagenesis
abolishes the ability of Ago1 to repress translation (Eulalio et al.,
2008). However, mutagenesis does not affect Ago1 binding to
m7GTP-coupled beads in vitro, and instead the mutant Ago1 is
impaired for binding to GW182. Moreover, GW182 bound to
mRNAs is sufficient to repress their translation without Ago1,
arguing against an obligatory Ago1-cap binding mechanism.
This data suggests that GW182 or a downstream factor could
be the eIF4E competitor.
A second model has proposed that miRISC stimulates deadenylation of the mRNA tail. In this model, translation is repressed
because the cap and PABP1-free tail of the deadenylated mRNA
are unable to circularize. In support of the model, many

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 651

repressed mRNAs are deadenylated by miRNAs in vivo (BehmAnsmant et al., 2006; Giraldez et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006) and
in vitro (Wakiyama et al., 2007). Deadenylation is not simply
a consequence of impaired initiation because IRES-containing
mRNAs are also deadenylated even though they are resistant
to translational repression by miRISC (Wakiyama et al., 2007).
Instead, deadenylation is promoted by GW182, which triggers
deadenylation and translation repression in Drosophila cells
(Behm-Ansmant et al., 2006).
Again, this model suffers from contradictory evidence. Nonpolyadenylated mRNAs can be translationally silenced by miRNAs
(Pillai et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2006; Eulalio et al., 2008). This effect
requires Ago and GW182 since depletion of both factors or
expression of a dominant-negative GW182 abrogates the effect
(Eulalio et al., 2008). Moreover, depletion of a component of the
deadenylase enzyme has little effect on translation repression by
GW182.
A third model has proposed that miRISC blocks association of
the 60S ribosomal subunit with the 40S preinitiation complex.
Human Ago2 physically associates with eIF6 and 60S ribosomal
subunits in vitro (Chendrimada et al., 2007). eIF6 is involved in the
biogenesis and maturation of 60S ribosomal subunits and
prevents their premature association with 40S subunits. Depletion of eIF6 in either human cells or C. elegans rescues mRNAs
from miRNA inhibition. In contrast, depletion of eIF6 in Drosophila
cells has little or no effect on silencing (Eulalio et al., 2008). A reticulocyte cell-free system provides additional evidence for the
model (Wang et al., 2008a). Targeted mRNAs become enriched
for 40S but not 60S ribosomal subunits after addition to
miRNA-programmed lysate. A toeprint of these mRNAs shows
relative protection over the initiating codon, consistent with 40S
ribosomal subunits paused at the start codon. Thus, the recruitment of eIF6 by miRISC may repress translation by preventing
the assembly of translationally competent ribosomes at the
start codon.
Degradation of mRNAs by miRNAs
Early studies of animal miRNAs indicated that translational
repression is not accompanied by mRNA destabilization.
However, for some miRNA-target interactions, there is a significant reduction in mRNA abundance due to an increase in mRNA
degradation (Bagga et al., 2005; Lim et al., 2005; Behm-Ansmant
et al., 2006; Giraldez et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006). This increased
degradation is not because of Ago-catalyzed mRNA cleavage
but rather because of deadenylation, decapping, and exonucleolytic digestion of the mRNA (Behm-Ansmant et al., 2006; Giraldez et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2006). It requires Ago, GW182, and
the cellular decapping and deadenylation machinery (BehmAnsmant et al., 2006). A critical question is whether degradation
is a consequence of a primary effect on translation. Some
evidence suggests that degradation can be uncoupled from
translation. Messages whose translation is prevented are nevertheless deadenylated in an miRNA-dependent manner (Wu et al.,
2006; Wakiyama et al., 2007). Furthermore, miRNA-mediated
mRNA degradation can occur in vitro without active translation
(Wakiyama et al., 2007). This suggests that degradation might
be an independent mechanism of repression for some targets.
At present it is unclear why some targets are degraded and
others are not. It has been suggested that the number, type,

652 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

and position of mismatches in the miRNA/mRNA duplex play
an important role in triggering degradation or translation arrest
(Aleman et al., 2007).
Blind Men and the Elephant?
It is difficult to reconcile these diverse accounts of the miRNA
mechanism with each other. Although it is formally possible
that different experimental approaches are responsible, other
explanations seem more likely. One explanation is that silencing
proceeds through a single unifying mechanism and that the
accounted differences reflect secondary events downstream.
Another explanation is that multiple mechanisms exist, and
particular mechanisms take pre-eminence according to conditions that we do not yet understand. In this way, we might be
in a present situation analogous to the fable of the blind men
describing the elephant. We do not yet see the trick that makes
the phenomenon whole and unified.
In this regard, it is important to consider this phenomenon in
the context of the whole cell and the myriad activities that affect
posttranscriptional gene regulation. One of these is the cell
cycle. The miRNA let-7 and an artificial miRNA (CXCR4) repress
translation in proliferating human cells but change into translational activators when the cell cycle is arrested at the G1 checkpoint by serum starvation (Vasudevan et al., 2007). The mode of
regulation (repression versus activation) is dependent on the
stage of the cell cycle and not whether the cells are arrested or
free cycling. Aphidicolin-induced arrest at G1 also generates
translational activation, whereas nocodazole-induced arrest at
G2/M generates translational repression. This mode of regulation is not universal since G1-arrested cells in the Drosophila
eye use miRNA-mediated repression (Li and Carthew, 2005).
Nevertheless, it appears to have a physiological role in regulating
expression of the cytokine TNFa. Lymphocyte growth arrest
induces TNFa expression that is required for macrophage maturation; miR-369-3p switches from a repressor to an activator of
TNFa translation when cells in culture are growth arrested (Vasudevan et al., 2007).
Another example of miRNA-mediated activation highlights the
possible importance of binding site position. Interaction of miR10a with the 50 UTR of certain ribosomal subunit mRNAs leads to
their activated translation, whereas interaction with the 30 UTR
leads to repression (Orom et al., 2008). Although this might
suggest a UTR rule, other studies show that miRNA interaction
with the 50 UTR can repress a postinitiation step of translation
(Lytle et al., 2007).
Other Cell Contexts
How small RNA regulation is organized and modulated within the
cell is an important issue. Ago proteins are frequently associated
with membrane trafficking compartments such as the Golgi and
ER (Cikaluk et al., 1999). Cytosolic extraction experiments
support this notion (Pillai et al., 2005). In this regard, it is worth
considering that miRISC factors might become anchored in
certain subcellular compartments. Among these compartments
are P bodies or GW bodies, discrete cytoplasmic foci in which
translationally inactive mRNAs often accumulate. Subunits of
miRISC (miRNAs, Ago, and GW182) and their repressed targets
are also enriched in GW bodies (Jakymiw et al., 2005; Liu et al.,
2005b; Pillai et al., 2005). GW bodies per se are not essential for
miRNA repression; depletion of certain GW body proteins results

in dispersal of the GW bodies with no effect on miRNA activities
(Eulalio et al., 2007). Rather, GW body formation requires an
intact miRNA pathway. These observations imply that silencing
is initiated elsewhere in the cytoplasm, and the localization into
GW bodies is a consequence of silencing.
Photobleaching experiments indicate that Ago proteins in
GW bodies exchange very slowly with other Ago molecules
(Leung et al., 2006). Are these bodies or other locales graveyards
for miRISC machinery bound to their targets? There might be
ways in which miRISC is recycled to allow engagement with
more targets. Interestingly, the importin protein Imp8 stimulates
miRISC-mediated silencing by enhancing association of Ago2
complexes to target mRNAs (Weinmann et al., 2009).
Conclusions
It is an exciting time in RNAi research. We are witnessing
a description of the chemical mechanism that just a few years
ago was unimagined. We are rethinking our views as to what
constitutes an siRNA or miRNA. The rules about biogenesis
and action are much more fluid than we thought. Perhaps the
most unwavering distinction between miRNAs and siRNAs has
been whether they silence their own expression. Almost all
siRNAs, whether endo-siRNAs or virus siRNAs, silence the
same locus from which they were derived. They sometimes
have the ability to silence other loci as well. But their capacity
to strike at their encoding DNA (in the case of some plant endosiRNAs) and RNA (in the case of virus or animal endo-siRNAs)
makes their production a continual struggle against themselves.
This of course is perfectly suited to their roles in defense. It also
means that they are highly adaptable, allowing for little or no
selective pressure to maintain their sequence conservation. In
contrast, most miRNAs do not silence their own loci but silence
other genes. This is attributable to the nuclear processing of
miRNA precursor RNAs coupled with nuclear exclusion of mature
effector miRNAs. Even this rule, however, is not absolute; human
miR-29b is a nuclear miRNA (Hwang et al., 2007), and Imp8 stimulates nuclear localization of Ago2 in cells (Weinmann et al.,
2009). Nevertheless, the overwhelming number of miRNAs that
exert strictly heterotypic silencing are more severely constrained
in the precision of their sequence structure because of the necessary coupling of their sequence to heterologous targets. This
feature makes miRNAs less adaptable for functions such as biological defense.
The leap of small RNAs from laboratory into the marketplace is
ongoing, and much of what has been learned in the past few
years is acting as a springboard (see Analysis by L. Bonetta in
this issue of Cell). Biotechnology will have to contend with issues
such as specificity that directly relate to mechanistic studies
pursued in the lab. Other hurdles such as delivery remain, and
one hopes that in the next few years as we learn more about
the cell biology of RNAi, these and other issues will be addressed
as rapidly as we have witnessed to date.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to members of our laboratories for stimulating discussions.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants GM077581
and GM068743 to R.W.C. and GM072830 to E.J.S.

REFERENCES
Aleman, L.M., Doench, J., and Sharp, P.A. (2007). Comparison of siRNAinduced off-target RNA and protein effects. RNA 13, 385–395.
Allen, E., Xie, Z., Gustafson, A.M., and Carrington, J.C. (2005). microRNAdirected phasing during trans-acting siRNA biogenesis in plants. Cell 121,
207–221.
Bagga, S., Bracht, J., Hunter, S., Massirer, K., Holtz, J., Eachus, R., and Pasquinelli, A.E. (2005). Regulation by let-7 and lin-4 miRNAs results in target
mRNA degradation. Cell 122, 553–563.
Bartel, D.P. (2004). MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function. Cell 116, 281–297.
Behm-Ansmant, I., Rehwinkel, J., Doerks, T., Stark, A., Bork, P., and Izaurralde, E. (2006). mRNA degradation by miRNAs and GW182 requires both
CCR4:NOT deadenylase and DCP1:DCP2 decapping complexes. Genes
Dev. 20, 1885–1898.
Brodersen, P., Sakvarelidze-Achard, L., Bruun-Rasmussen, M., Dunoyer, P.,
Yamamoto, Y.Y., Sieburth, L., and Voinnet, O. (2008). Widespread translational inhibition by plant miRNAs and siRNAs. Science 320, 1185–1190.
Bühler, M., Verdel, A., and Moazed, D. (2006). Tethering RITS to a nascent
transcript initiates RNAi- and heterochromatin-dependent gene silencing.
Cell 125, 873–886.
Chendrimada, T.P., Finn, K.J., Ji, X., Baillat, D., Gregory, R.I., Liebhaber, S.A.,
Pasquinelli, A.E., and Shiekhattar, R. (2007). MicroRNA silencing through RISC
recruitment of eIF6. Nature 447, 823–828.
Chu, C.Y., and Rana, TmM. (2006). Translation repression in human cells by
microRNA-induced gene silencing requires RCK/p54. PLoS Biol. 4, e210.
Cikaluk, D.E., Tahbaz, N., Hendricks, L.C., DiMattia, G.E., Hansen, D., Pilgrim,
D., and Hobman, T.C. (1999). GERp95, a membrane-associated protein that
belongs to a family of proteins involved in stem cell differentiation. Mol. Biol.
Cell 10, 3357–3372.
Denli, A.M., Tops, B.B., Plasterk, R.H., Ketting, R.F., and Hannon, G.J. (2004).
Processing of primary microRNAs by the Microprocessor complex. Nature
432, 231–235.
Ding, X.C., and Grosshans, H. (2009). Repression of C. elegans microRNA
targets at the initiation level of translation requires GW182 proteins. EMBO J.
Published online January 8, 2009. 10.1038/emboj.2008.275.
Djupedal, I., Portoso, M., Spåhr, H., Bonilla, C., Gustafsson, C.M., Allshire, R.,
and Ekwall, K. (2005). RNA Pol II subunit Rpb7 promotes centromeric transcription and RNAi-directed chromatin silencing. Genes Dev. 19, 2301–2306.
Ender, C., Krek, A., Friedlander, M.R., Beitzinger, M., Weinmann, L., Chen, W.,
Pfeffer, S., Rajewsky, N., and Meister, G. (2008). A human snoRNA with microRNA-like functions. Mol. Cell 32, 519–528.
Eulalio, A., Behm-Ansmant, I., Schweizer, D., and Izaurralde, E. (2007). P-body
formation is a consequence, not the cause, of RNA-mediated gene silencing.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 27, 3970–3981.
Eulalio, A., Huntzinger, E., and Izaurralde, E. (2008). GW182 interaction with
Argonaute is essential for miRNA-mediated translational repression and
mRNA decay. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15, 346–353.
Förstemann, K., Horwich, M.D., Wee, L., Tomari, Y., and Zamore, P.D. (2007).
Drosophila microRNAs are sorted into functionally distinct Argonaute protein
complexes after production by Dicer-1. Cell 130, 287–297.
Forstemann, K., Tomari, Y., Du, T., Vagin, V.V., Denli, A.M., Bratu, D.P., Klattenhoff, C., Theurkauf, W.E., and Zamore, P.D. (2005). Normal microRNA
maturation and germ-line stem cell maintenance requires Loquacious,
a double-stranded RNA-binding domain protein. PLoS Biol. 3, e236.
Giraldez, A.J., Mishima, Y., Rihel, J., Grocock, R.J., Van Dongen, S., Inoue, K.,
Enright, A.J., and Schier, A.F. (2006). Zebrafish MiR-430 promotes deadenylation and clearance of maternal mRNAs. Science 312, 75–79.
Golden, D.E., Gerbasi, V.R., and Sontheimer, E.J. (2008). An inside job for
siRNAs. Mol. Cell 31, 309–312.

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 653

Gregory, R.I., Chendrimada, T.P., Cooch, N., and Shiekhattar, R. (2005).
Human RISC couples microRNA biogenesis and posttranscriptional gene
silencing. Cell 123, 631–640.
Grewal, S.I., and Elgin, S.C. (2007). Transcription and RNA interference in the
formation of heterochromatin. Nature 447, 399–406.
Guang, S., Bochner, A.F., Pavelec, D.M., Burkhart, K.B., Harding, S., Lachowiec, J., and Kennedy, S. (2008). An Argonaute transports siRNAs from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus. Science 321, 537–541.
Hammond, S.M., Bernstein, E., Beach, D., and Hannon, G.J. (2000). An RNAdirected nuclease mediates post-transcriptional gene silencing in Drosophila
cells. Nature 404, 293–296.
Han, J., Lee, Y., Yeom, K.H., Nam, J.W., Heo, I., Rhee, J.K., Sohn, S.Y., Cho,
Y., Zhang, B.T., and Kim, V.N. (2006). Molecular basis for the recognition of
primary microRNAs by the Drosha-DGCR8 complex. Cell 125, 887–901.
Henderson, I.R., and Jacobsen, S.E. (2007). Epigenetic inheritance in plants.
Nature 447, 418–424.

Lim, L.P., Lau, N.C., Garrett-Engele, P., Grimson, A., Schelter, J.M., Castle, J.,
Bartel, D.P., Linsley, P.S., and Johnson, J.M. (2005). Microarray analysis
shows that some microRNAs downregulate large numbers of target mRNAs.
Nature 433, 769–773.
Lippman, Z., and Martienssen, R. (2004). The role of RNA interference in
heterochromatic silencing. Nature 431, 364–370.
Liu, J., Rivas, F.V., Wohlschlegel, J., Yates, J.R., 3rd, Parker, R., and Hannon,
G.J. (2005a). A role for the P-body component GW182 in microRNA function.
Nat. Cell Biol. 7, 1261–1266.
Liu, J., Valencia-Sanchez, M.A., Hannon, G.J., and Parker, R. (2005b). MicroRNA-dependent localization of targeted mRNAs to mammalian P-bodies. Nat.
Cell Biol. 7, 719–723.
Lu, J., Shen, Y., Wu, Q., Kumar, S., He, B., Shi, S., Carthew, R.W., Wang, S.M.,
and Wu, C.I. (2008). The birth and death of microRNA genes in Drosophila. Nat.
Genet. 40, 351–355.

Heo, I., Joo, C., Cho, J., Ha, M., Han, J., and Kim, V.N. (2008). Lin28 mediates
the terminal uridylation of let-7 precursor MicroRNA. Mol. Cell 32, 276–284.

Lytle, J.R., Yario, T.A., and Steitz, J.A. (2007). Target mRNAs are repressed as
efficiently by microRNA-binding sites in the 50 UTR as in the 30 UTR. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 104, 9667–9672.

Herr, A.J., Jensen, M.B., Dalmay, T., and Baulcombe, D.C. (2005). RNA polymerase IV directs silencing of endogenous DNA. Science 308, 118–120.

Ma, E., Macrae, I., Kirsch, J.F., and Doudna, J. (2008). Autoinhibition of human
dicer by its internal helicase domain. J. Mol. Biol. 380, 237–243.

Hock, J., Weinmann, L., Ender, C., Rudel, S., Kremmer, E., Raabe, M., Urlaub,
H., and Meister, G. (2007). Proteomic and functional analysis of Argonautecontaining mRNA-protein complexes in human cells. EMBO Rep. 8,
1052–1060.

Ma, J.B., Yuan, Y.R., Meister, G., Pei, Y., Tuschl, T., and Patel, D.J. (2005).
Structural basis for 50 -end-specific recognition of guide RNA by the A. fulgidus
Piwi protein. Nature 434, 666–670.

Humphreys, D.T., Westman, B.J., Martin, D.I., and Preiss, T. (2005). MicroRNAs control translation initiation by inhibiting eukaryotic initiation factor 4E/
cap and poly(A) tail function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 16961–16966.
Hwang, H.W., Wentzel, E.A., and Mendell, J.T. (2007). A hexanucleotide
element directs microRNA nuclear import. Science 315, 97–100.
Jakymiw, A., Lian, S., Eystathioy, T., Li, S., Satoh, M., Hamel, J.C., Fritzler,
M.J., and Chan, E.K. (2005). Disruption of GW bodies impairs mammalian
RNA interference. Nat. Cell Biol. 7, 1267–1274.
Jiang, F., Ye, X., Liu, X., Fincher, L., McKearin, D., and Liu, Q. (2005). Dicer-1
and R3D1-L catalyze microRNA maturation in Drosophila. Genes Dev. 19,
1674–1679.
Kanellopoulou, C., Muljo, S.A., Kung, A.L., Ganesan, S., Drapkin, R.,
Jenuwein, T., Livingston, D.M., and Rajewsky, K. (2005). Dicer-deficient
mouse embryonic stem cells are defective in differentiation and centromeric
silencing. Genes Dev. 19, 489–501.
Kato, H., Goto, D.B., Martienssen, R.A., Urano, T., Furukawa, K., and
Murakami, Y. (2005). RNA polymerase II is required for RNAi-dependent
heterochromatin assembly. Science 309, 467–469.
Kim, K., Lee, Y.S., and Carthew, R.W. (2007). Conversion of pre-RISC to holoRISC by Ago2 during assembly of RNAi complexes. RNA 13, 22–29.
Kim, V.N. (2005). MicroRNA biogenesis: coordinated cropping and dicing. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6, 376–385.
Kiriakidou, M., Tan, G.S., Lamprinaki, S., De Planell-Saguer, M., Nelson, P.T.,
and Mourelatos, Z. (2007). An mRNA m7G cap binding-like motif within human
Ago2 represses translation. Cell 129, 1141–1151.
Landthaler, M., Gaidatzis, D., Rothballer, A., Chen, P., Soll, S.J., Dinic, L.,
Ojo, T., Hafner, M., Zavolan, M., and Tuschl, T. (2008). Molecular characterization of human Argonaute-containing ribonucleoprotein complexes and their
bound target mRNAs. RNA 14, 2580–2596.
Lee, Y., Ahn, C., Han, J., Choi, H., Kim, J., Yim, J., Lee, J., Provost, P.,
Radmark, O., Kim, S., and Kim, V.N. (2003). The nuclear RNase III Drosha initiates microRNA processing. Nature 425, 415–419.

Macrae, I.J., Zhou, K., Li, F., Repic, A., Brooks, A.N., Cande, W.Z., Adams,
P.D., and Doudna, J.A. (2006). Structural basis for double-stranded RNA
processing by Dicer. Science 311, 195–198.
Macrae, I.J., Zhou, K., and Doudna, J.A. (2007). Structural determinants of
RNA recognition and cleavage by Dicer. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 934–940.
Macrae, I.J., Ma, E., Zhou, M., Robinson, C.V., and Doudna, J.A. (2008). In vitro
reconstitution of the human RISC-loading complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
105, 512–517.
Maniataki, E., and Mourelatos, Z. (2005). A human, ATP-independent, RISC
assembly machine fueled by pre-miRNA. Genes Dev. 19, 2979–2990.
Maroney, P.A., Yu, Y., Fisher, J., and Nilsen, T.W. (2006). Evidence that microRNAs are associated with translating messenger RNAs in human cells. Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol. 13, 1102–1107.
Mathonnet, G., Fabian, M.R., Svitkin, Y.V., Parsyan, A., Huck, L., Murata, T.,
Biffo, S., Merrick, W.C., Darzynkiewicz, E., Pillai, R.S., et al. (2007). MicroRNA
inhibition of translation initiation in vitro by targeting the cap-binding complex
eIF4F. Science 317, 1764–1767.
Matranga, C., Tomari, Y., Shin, C., Bartel, D., and Zamore, P. (2005).
Passenger-strand cleavage facilitates assembly of siRNA into Ago2-containing RNAi enzyme complexes. Cell 123, 607–620.
Meister, G., and Tuschl, T. (2004). Mechanisms of gene silencing by doublestranded RNA. Nature 431, 343–349.
Meister, G., Landthaler, M., Peters, L., Chen, P.Y., Urlaub, H., Luhrmann, R.,
and Tuschl, T. (2005). Identification of novel argonaute-associated proteins.
Curr. Biol. 15, 2149–2155.
Mello, C.C., and Conte, D., Jr. (2004). Revealing the world of RNA interference.
Nature 431, 338–342.
Miyoshi, K., Tsukumo, H., Nagami, T., Siomi, H., and Siomi, M.C. (2005). Slicer
function of Drosophila Argonautes and its involvement in RISC formation.
Genes Dev. 19, 2837–2848.
Moazed, D. (2009). Small RNAs in transcriptional gene silencing and genome
defence. Nature 457, 413–420.

Leung, A.K., Calabrese, J.M., and Sharp, P.A. (2006). Quantitative analysis of
Argonaute protein reveals microRNA-dependent localization to stress
granules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 18125–18130.

Murchison, E.P., Partridge, J.F., Tam, O.H., Cheloufi, S., and Hannon, G.
(2005). Characterization of Dicer-deficient murine embryonic stem cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 12135–12140.

Li, X., and Carthew, R.W. (2005). A microRNA mediates EGF receptor signaling
and promotes photoreceptor differentiation in the Drosophila eye. Cell 123,
1267–1277.

Newman, M.A., Thomson, J.M., and Hammond, S.M. (2008). Lin-28 interaction
with the Let-7 precursor loop mediates regulated microRNA processing. RNA
14, 1539–1549.

654 Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc.

Nottrott, S., Simard, M.J., and Richter, J.D. (2006). Human let-7a miRNA
blocks protein production on actively translating polyribosomes. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 13, 1108–1114.

Song, J.J., Smith, S.K., Hannon, G., and Joshua-Tor, L. (2004). Crystal structure of Argonaute and its implications for RISC slicer activity. Science 305,
1434–1437.

Ohrt, T., Mütze, J., Staroske, W., Weinmann, L., Höck, J., Crell, K., Meister, G.,
and Schwille, P. (2008). Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy reveal the cytoplasmic origination of
loaded nuclear RISC in vivo in human cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, 6439–6449.

Sugiyama, T., Cam, H., Verdel, A., Moazed, D., and Grewal, S. (2005). RNAdependent RNA polymerase is an essential component of a self-enforcing
loop coupling heterochromatin assembly to siRNA production. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102, 152–157.

Okamura, K., Hagen, J.W., Duan, H., Tyler, D.M., and Lai, E.C. (2007). The
mirtron pathway generates microRNA-class regulatory RNAs in Drosophila.
Cell 130, 89–100.

Thermann, R., and Hentze, M.W. (2007). Drosophila miR2 induces pseudopolysomes and inhibits translation initiation. Nature 447, 875–878.

Okamura, K., Phillips, M.D., Tyler, D.M., Duan, H., Chou, Y.T., and Lai, E.C.
(2008). The regulatory activity of microRNA* species has substantial influence
on microRNA and 30 UTR evolution. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 15, 354–363.

Till, S., Lejeune, E., Thermann, R., Bortfeld, M., Hothorn, M., Enderle, D.,
Heinrich, C., Hentze, M.W., and Ladurner, A.G. (2007). A conserved motif in
Argonaute-interacting proteins mediates functional interactions through the
Argonaute PIWI domain. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 14, 897–903.

Onodera, Y., Haag, J.R., Ream, T., Nunes, P.C., Pontes, O., and Pikaard, C.S.
(2005). Plant nuclear RNA polymerase IV mediates siRNA and DNA methylation-dependent heterochromatin formation. Cell 120, 613–622.

Tomari, Y., Du, T., and Zamore, P.D. (2007). Sorting of Drosophila small
silencing RNAs. Cell 130, 299–308.

Orban, T.I., and Izaurralde, E. (2005). Decay of mRNAs targeted by RISC
requires XRN1, the Ski complex, and the exosome. RNA 11, 459–469.

Tomari, Y., and Zamore, P.D. (2005). Perspective: machines for RNAi. Genes
Dev. 19, 517–529.

Orom, U.A., Nielsen, F.C., and Lund, A.H. (2008). MicroRNA-10a binds the
50 UTR of ribosomal protein mRNAs and enhances their translation. Mol. Cell
30, 460–471.

Vasudevan, S., Tong, Y., and Steitz, J.A. (2007). Switching from repression to
activation: microRNAs can up-regulate translation. Science 318, 1931–1934.

Pak, J., and Fire, A. (2007). Distinct populations of primary and secondary
effectors during RNAi in C. elegans. Science 315, 241–244.

Vazquez, F., Vaucheret, H., Rajagopalan, R., Lepers, C., Gasciolli, V., Mallory,
A.C., Hilbert, J.-L., Bartel, D.P., and Crete, P. (2004). Endogenous trans-acting
siRNAs regulate the accumulation of Arabidopsis mRNAs. Mol. Cell 16, 69–79.

Parker, J.S., Roe, S.M., and Barford, D. (2004). Crystal structure of a PIWI
protein suggests mechanisms for siRNA recognition and slicer activity.
EMBO J. 23, 4727–4737.

Vermeulen, A., Behlen, L., Reynolds, A., Wolfson, A., Marshall, W.S., Karpilow,
J., and Khvorova, A. (2005). The contributions of dsRNA structure to Dicer
specificity and efficiency. RNA 11, 674–682.

Parker, J.S., Roe, S.M., and Barford, D. (2005). Structural insights into mRNA
recognition from a PIWI domain-siRNA guide complex. Nature 434, 663–666.

Viswanathan, S.R., Daley, G.Q., and Gregory, R.I. (2008). Selective blockade
of microRNA processing by Lin28. Science 320, 97–100.

Petersen, C.P., Bordeleau, M.E., Pelletier, J., and Sharp, P.A. (2006). Short
RNAs repress translation after initiation in mammalian cells. Mol. Cell 21,
533–542.

Wakiyama, M., Takimoto, K., Ohara, O., and Yokoyama, S. (2007). Let-7
microRNA-mediated mRNA deadenylation and translational repression in
a mammalian cell-free system. Genes Dev. 21, 1857–1862.

Pillai, R.S., Artus, C.G., and Filipowicz, W. (2004). Tethering of human Ago
proteins to mRNA mimics the miRNA-mediated repression of protein
synthesis. RNA 10, 1518–1525.
Pillai, R.S., Bhattacharyya, S.N., Artus, C.G., Zoller, T., Cougot, N., Basyuk, E.,
Bertrand, E., and Filipowicz, W. (2005). Inhibition of translational initiation by
Let-7 MicroRNA in human cells. Science 309, 1573–1576.
Rand, T.A., Petersen, S., Du, F., and Wang, X. (2005). Argonaute2 cleaves the
anti-guide strand of siRNA during RISC activation. Cell 123, 621–629.
Rivas, F.V., Tolia, N.H., Song, J.J., Aragon, J.P., Liu, J., Hannon, G.J., and
Joshua-Tor, L. (2005). Purified Argonaute2 and an siRNA form recombinant
human RISC. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 12, 340–349.
Robb, G.B., Brown, K.M., Khurana, J., and Rana, T.M. (2005). Specific and
potent RNAi in the nucleus of human cells. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 12, 133–137.
Ruby, J.G., Jan, C.H., and Bartel, D.P. (2007). Intronic microRNA precursors
that bypass Drosha processing. Nature 448, 83–86.
Rybak, A., Fuchs, H., Smirnova, L., Brandt, C., Pohl, E.E., Nitsch, R., and Wulczyn, F.G. (2008). A feedback loop comprising lin-28 and let-7 controls pre-let-7
maturation during neural stem-cell commitment. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 987–993.
Saito, K., Ishizuka, A., Siomi, H., and Siomi, M. (2005). Processing of premicroRNAs by the Dicer-1-Loquacious complex in Drosophila cells. PLoS
Biol. 3, e235.
Seggerson, K., Tang, L., and Moss, E.G. (2002). Two genetic circuits repress
the Caenorhabditis elegans heterochronic gene lin-28 after translation initiation. Dev. Biol. 243, 215–225.

Wang, B., Yanez, A., and Novina, C.D. (2008a). MicroRNA-repressed
mRNAs contain 40S but not 60S components. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
105, 5343–5348.
Wang, Y., Juranek, S., Li, H., Sheng, G., Tuschl, T., and Patel, D.J. (2008b).
Structure of an argonaute silencing complex with a seed-containing guide
DNA and target RNA duplex. Nature 456, 921–926.
Wang, Y., Sheng, G., Juranek, S., Tuschl, T., and Patel, D.J. (2008c). Structure
of the guide-strand-containing argonaute silencing complex. Nature 456,
209–213.
Weinmann, L., Höck, J., Ivacevic, T., Ohrt, T., Mütze, J., Schwille, P., Kremmer,
E., Benes, V., Urlaub, H., and Meister, G. (2009). Importin 8 is a gene silencing
factor that targets Argonaute proteins to distinct mRNAs. Cell 136, 496–507.
Wierzbicki, A.T., Haag, J.R., and Pikaard, C. (2008). Noncoding transcription
by RNA polymerase Pol IVb/Pol V mediates transcriptional silencing of
overlapping and adjacent genes. Cell 135, 635–648.
Wu, L., Fan, J., and Belasco, J.G. (2006). MicroRNAs direct rapid deadenylation of mRNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 4034–4039.
Yigit, E., Batista, P.J., Bei, Y., Pang, K.M., Chen, C.C., Tolia, N.H., Joshua-Tor,
L., Mitani, S., Simard, M.J., and Mello, C.C. (2006). Analysis of the C. elegans
Argonaute family reveals that distinct Argonautes act sequentially during RNAi.
Cell 127, 747–757.

Shen, B., and Goodman, H.M. (2004). Uridine addition after microRNAdirected cleavage. Science 306, 997.

Yuan, Y.R., Pei, Y., Ma, J., Kuryavyi, V., Zhadina, M., Meister, G., Chen, H.Y.,
Dauter, Z., Tuschl, T., and Patel, D. (2005). Crystal structure of A. aeolicus
argonaute, a site-specific DNA-guided endoribonuclease, provides insights
into RISC-mediated mRNA cleavage. Mol. Cell 19, 405–419.

Sijen, T., Steiner, F.A., Thijssen, K.L., and Plasterk, R.H. (2007). Secondary
siRNAs result from unprimed RNA synthesis and form a distinct class. Science
315, 244–247.

Zhang, H., Kolb, F., Jaskiewicz, L., Westhof, E., and Filipowicz, W. (2004).
Single processing center models for human Dicer and bacterial RNase III.
Cell 118, 57–68.

Cell 136, 642–655, February 20, 2009 ª2009 Elsevier Inc. 655

