The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 37 (2005) 942–946

Cell in focus

Dopaminergic neurons
Shankar J. Chinta, Julie K. Andersen∗
Buck Institute for Age Research, Neurobiology Department, 8001, Redwood Blvd, Novato, CA 94945, USA
Received 14 July 2004; received in revised form 6 August 2004; accepted 16 September 2004

Abstract
Dopaminergic neurons of the midbrain are the main source of dopamine (DA) in the mammalian central nervous system. Their
loss is associated with one of the most prominent human neurological disorders, Parkinson’s disease (PD). Dopaminergic neurons
are found in a ‘harsh’ region of the brain, the substantia nigra pars compacta, which is DA-rich and contains both redox available
neuromelanin and a high iron content. Although their numbers are few, these dopaminergic neurons play an important role in
the control of multiple brain functions including voluntary movement and a broad array of behavioral processes such as mood,
reward, addiction, and stress. Studies into the developmental pathways which are involved in the generation of dopaminergic
neurons in the brain have led to the identification of several specific transcription factors including Nurr1, Lmx1b and Pitx3,
all shown to be important in the development of the mesencephalic dopaminergic system. The selective degeneration of these
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta leads to PD but the exact cause for this nigral cell loss is still unknown.
© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Cell facts
• Dopaminergic neurons correspond to approximately 3–5% of total neurons in the substantia nigra.
• Dopaminergic neurons play a significant role in the cardiovascular, renal, hormonal, and central nervous systems.
They are thought to control processes as diverse as movement and drug addiction.
• An excessive amount of dopamine in the brain is affiliated with schizophrenia characterized by altered behavior
and delusions.
• Dopamine deficiency in the substantia nigra in aged populations results in PD which constitutes a major public
health burden in westernized countries where the average life expectancy is 85 years or greater.
Keywords: Dopamine; Substantia nigra; Parkinson’s disease

1. Introduction
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 415 209 2070;

fax: +1 415 209 2231.
E-mail address: jandersen@buckinstitute.org (J.K. Andersen).
1357-2725/$ – see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.biocel.2004.09.009

Dopamine is one of the most intensively studied
neurotransmitters in the brain due to its involvement in
several mental and neurological disorders. Midbrain

S.J. Chinta, J.K. Andersen / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 37 (2005) 942–946

Fig. 1. Representation of dopaminergic pathway system in human
brain.

dopaminergic neurons constitute the major source of
dopamine in the mammalian central nervous system.
Identification and localization of brain dopamine cell
groups was originally performed using the FalckHillarp histofluorescence method (Falck et al., 1962),
which is based on the visualization of fluorescent
monoamines following formaldehyde treatment.
Dopaminergic neurons are an anatomically and functionally heterogeneous group of cells, localized in the
diencephalon, mesencephalon and the olfactory bulb
(Björklund & Lindvall, in press). The most prominent
dopaminergic cell group resides in the ventral part
of mesencephalon, which contains approximately
90% of the total number of brain dopaminergic
cells. The mesencephalic dopaminergic system
has been subdivided into several nominal systems
(Fig. 1). Probably, the best known is the nigrostriatal
system, which originates in the zona compacta of
the substantia nigra (SNc) and extends its fibers
into the caudate-putamen (also known as the dorsal
striatum). The nigrostriatal pathway plays an essential
role in the control of voluntary motor movement.
More medial to this pathway are the mesolimbic and
mesocortical dopaminergic systems, which arise from
dopaminergic cells present in the ventral tegmental
area (VTA). These dopaminergic systems are involved
in emotion-based behavior including motivation and
reward. The cells of the VTA project most prominently
into the nucleus accumbens, olfactory tubercle but also
innervate the septum, amygdala and hippocampus.
This subset of projections is known as the mesolimbic

943

dopaminergic system. Cells in the medial VTA project
to the prefrontal, cingulate and perirhinal cortex. This
pathway is known as the mesocortical dopaminergic
system. There is considerable overlap between the
VTA cells that project to these various targets.
Because of the overlap between the mesocortical and
mesolimbic dopaminergic neurons, the two systems
are often collectively referred to as the mesocorticolimbic system (Wise, 2004). The various clusters of
dopaminergic neurons in the central nervous system
therefore, have different anatomical positions and
projections and play crucial roles in different cellular
functions. In principle they may be considered as
totally unrelated neurons having in common only the
synthesis of the neurotransmitter dopamine.
Considerable differences exist in the numbers
of midbrain dopaminergic cell bodies in various
mammals ranging from about 45,000 in the rat,
165,000 in the macaca monkey, to 590,000 in human
beings (German & Manaye, 1993). This latter number
applies to humans in their fourth decade of life but
drops to an average of about 350,000 during the sixth
decade of life (Bogerts, Hantsch, & Herzer, 1983).
Such an age-dependent decrease in the numbers of
midbrain dopaminergic cells has also been reported
for nonhuman primates however not for rodents such
as mice or rats perhaps due to their short life spans.

2. Cell origin and plasticity
The development of midbrain dopaminergic neurons follows a number of stages marked by distinct
events. Most of the dopamine-containing cells develop
from a single embryological cell group that originates at the mesencephalic–diencephalic junction and
projects to various forebrain targets. Developmental
studies of the pathways involved, have led to the identification of several factors that influence the final formation of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in the adult
animal. The identity of early proliferating dopaminergic progenitor cells are specified by the existence
of two secreted signaling proteins, sonic hedgehog
(Shh) and fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8), derived
from the floor plate of the ventral midline and the
mid/hindbrain border, respectively. While transcription
factors that are specifically expressed in the proliferating dopaminergic progenitor cells have yet to be

944

S.J. Chinta, J.K. Andersen / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 37 (2005) 942–946

identified, others important for post-mitotic dopaminergic cell development have already been characterized. These include Nurr1, Lmx1b, Pitx3, and En1/En2.
Nurr1 appears to be strictly coupled to neurotransmitter synthesis (Zetterstrom et al., 1997), where as
Lmx1b is necessary for the expression of Pitx3 (Smidt
et al., 2000). Pitx3 is expressed exclusively in mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons and involved in development and/or maintenance of these neurons (Nunes,
Tovmasian, Silva, Burke, & Goff, 2003). Studies analyzing the functions of these transcription factors has
not only increased the understanding of how dopaminergic neurons are generated in vivo, but also allowed
the development of new strategies in stem cells for engineering dopaminergic neurons in vitro. These results
may be significant in terms of the development of future
therapies for PD patients (Wallen & Perlmann, 2003).
3. Functions
Although dopaminergic neurons correspond to less
than 1% of the total number of brain neurons, they play
an important role in regulating several aspects of basic
brain function. They are necessary for tasks specific
to the brain regions that they innervate including motor behavior, motivation and working memory. Regulation of dopamine therefore plays a crucial role in both
our mental and physical health. Dopaminergic neurons,
for example, play a crucial role in the reward system
that controls the learning of many specific behaviors.
Unpredicted rewards in monkeys increase firing of the
dopamine neurons while the absence of an expected
reward has an inhibitory effect. This has led to the proposal that dopamine neurons function as detectors of
reward prediction errors (Schultz, 1997).
4. Dopamine and associated pathologies
Dopaminergic neurons are believed to be particularly prone to oxidative stress due to their high rate
of oxygen metabolism, low levels of antioxidants, and
high iron content. Dopamine is thought to be capable of generating toxic reactive oxygen species (ROS)
via both its enzymatic and non-enzymatic catabolism
(Halliwell, 1992). Specifically, dopamine oxidation
can occur either spontaneously in the presence of
transition metal ions or via an enzyme-catalyzed re-

action involving monoamine oxidase (MAO). Oxidation of dopamine via MAO generates a spectrum
of toxic species including H2 O2 , oxygen radicals,
semiquinones, and quinones (Graham, Tiffany, Bell, &
Gutknecht, 1978). Conditions that increase brain
concentration and/or turnover of dopamine could potentially increase the formation of reactive metabolites
especially under conditions in which the ratio of available dopamine to antioxidant capacity is high (Hastings
& Zigmond, 1994).
One of the major neurodegenerative disorders
associated with dopaminergic cell loss is PD. PD,
first described by James Parkinson in 1817, is a
neurodegenerative disorder associated with specific
neuropathological lesions (Parkinson, 1817). The
main pathological hallmark of PD is a progressive loss
of neuromelanin-containing dopaminergic neurons in
the SNpc of the ventral midbrain. Dopaminergic cell
loss is associated with the presence of eosinophilic intraneuronal inclusions, called Lewy bodies, composed
of alpha-synuclein, neurofilaments, and ubiquitin
(Goldman, Yen, Chiu, & Peress, 1983). In PD, the loss
of nigral neurons follows a specific pattern with the
more susceptible area being located laterally in the ventral part of the SNpc. This results in severe dopamine
depletion in the striatum, responsible for the motor
symptoms associated with PD, especially bradykinesia
(slowness of movement), tremor, rigidity and loss of
postural control. Other less severe lesions, such as
degeneration of the dopaminergic VTA, the noradrenergic locus ceruleus and the ascending cholinergic
pathway from the Meynert basalis nucleus are also
observed (Candy, Perry, Perry, Irving, Blessed, & Fairbairn, 1983) These non-nigral lesions lead to cognitive
and psychological impairments such as dementia,
which is estimated to occur in around 30% of all PD
cases (Aarsland, Tandberg, Larsen, & Cummings,
1996). Although the pathological changes and motor
dysfunction that characterize the disease are well
documented, the mechanism(s) responsible for the
death of dopaminergic neurons has yet to be clearly
established. Therefore, most of the current treatment
for the disease is largely symptomatic rather than
preventative. The most commonly prescribed drug
for PD is l-dopa. l-Dopa is the natural precursor for
the metabolism of dopamine (Cotzias,Van Woert, &
Schiffer, 1967). It is used as a treatment for PD patients
to replace lost midbrain dopamine as, unlike dopamine

S.J. Chinta, J.K. Andersen / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 37 (2005) 942–946

itself, which is charged, it can cross the blood-brain
barrier. While intake of l-dopa reduces the severity of
Parkinsonian symptoms suggesting that it is effectively
transformed into dopamine within the SNpc, it also
causes severe side effects such as nausea, vomiting,
and altered blood pressure. Unfortunately, l-dopa and
other Parkinsonian drugs are only able to control the
symptoms of the disease but not on-going cell death
and eventually become ineffective once sufficient
dopaminergic neurons are lost. Despite the failure of
l-dopa to prevent continued neurodegeneration it is
still one of the major prescribed treatments for the disease. Dopamine agonists are also used therapeutically
to replace dopamine function in the affected brain.
However, so far none appears to work as efficiently as
l-dopa. Before l-dopa was discovered, surgery was
used to treat PD. Recently, there has been resurgence
in the use of surgical techniques such as pallidotomy
and thalamotomy in which lesions are made in the
patient’s globus pallidus or thalamus, respectively.
While these surgical treatments appear to relieve the
symptoms in certain PD patients, they are not effective
in all cases. Experimental methods used at this time
include deep brain stimulation, where electrodes are
placed in the brain, which stimulate the thalamus
and the implantation of stem cells. Transplantation
of neural stem cells from fetal tissue into the PD
striatum seems to be the most promising approach,
as the fetal tissue not only appears to survive in the
host, but also to replace the function of the damaged
dopaminergic neurons (Storch, Sabolek, Milosevic,
Schwarz, & Schwarz, 2004). However, a recent clinical
trial examining transplantation of fetal stem cell tissue
into older Parkinsonian patients unfortunately showed
no more efficacy than sham surgery based on patient
self-report (Freed et al., 2001). In addition, this technique carries with it a host of ethical issues. Scientists
hope that eventually techniques will be refined to
enable stem cells from the patient’s own body to be
coaxed into dopaminergic SNpc neurons, which can
then be used for the replacement of the midbrain
dopaminergic neurons lost during the disease process.
References
Aarsland, D., Tandberg, E., Larsen, J. P., & Cummings, J. L. (1996).
Frequency of dementia in Parkinson disease. Archives of Neurology, 53, 538–542.

945

Björklund, A., & Lindvall, O. (in press). Dopamine-containing systems in the CNS. In A. BjÖrklund, & T. HÖkfelt (Eds.), Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy: Vol. 2. Classical Transmitters
in the CNS, Part I. Elsevier Science Publishers.
Bogerts, B., Hantsch, J., & Herzer, M. (1983). A morphometric study
of the dopamine-containing cell groups in the mesencephalon
of normals, Parkinson patients, and schizophrenics. Biological
Psychiatry, 18(9), 951–969, Sep.
Candy, J. M., Perry, R. H., Perry, E. K., Irving, D., Blessed, G.,
Fairbairn, A. F., et al. (1983). Pathological changes in the nucleus
of Meynert in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. Journal of
the Neurological Sciences, 59, 277–289.
Cotzias, G. C., Van Woert, M. H., & Schiffer, L. M. (1967). Aromatic
amino acids and modification of Parkinsonism. The New England
Journal of Medicine, 276, 374–379.
Falck, B., et al. (1962). Fluorescence of catecholamines and related
compounds condensed with formaldehyde. The Journal of Histochemistry and Cytochemistry, 10, 348–354.
Freed, C. R., Greene, P. E., Breeze, R. E., Tsai, W. Y., DuMouchel, W.,
Kao, R., et al. (2001). Transplantation of embryonic dopamine
neurons for severe Parkinson’s disease. The New England Journal
of Medicine, 344(10), 710–719, Mar.
German, D. C., & Manaye, K. F. (1993). Midbrain dopaminergic neurons (nuclei A8, A9, and A10): Three-dimensional reconstruction in the rat. The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 331(3),
297–309, May 15.
Graham, D. G., Tiffany, S. M., Bell, W. R., Jr., & Gutknecht, W. F.
(1978). Autoxidation versus covalent binding of quinones as the
mechanism of toxicity of dopamine, 6-hydroxydopamine, and
related compounds toward C1300 neuroblastoma cells in vitro.
Molecular Pharmacology, 14, 644–653.
Goldman, J. E., Yen, S. H., Chiu, F. C., Peress, N. S. (1983). Lewy
bodies of Parkinson’s disease contain neurofilament antigens.
Science 221, 1082–1084.1987–1990.
Halliwell, B. (1992). Reactive oxygen species and the central nervous
system. Journal of Neurochemistry, 59, 1609–1623.
Hastings, T. G., & Zigmond, M. J. (1994). Identification of catecholprotein conjugates in neostriatal slices incubated with [3H]
dopamine: Impact of ascorbic acid and glutathione. Journal of
Neurochemistry, 63, 1126–1132.
Nunes, I., Tovmasian, L. T., Silva, R. M., Burke, R. E., & Goff, S.
P. (2003). Pitx3 is required for development of substantia nigra
dopaminergic neurons. Pitx3 is required for development of substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 100(7),
4245–4250, April 1.
Parkinson, J. (1917). An Essay on the Shaking Palsy. London: Sherwood, Neely, and Jones.
Schultz, W. (1997). Dopamine neurons and their role in reward mechanisms. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 7(2), 191–197, April.
Smidt, M. P., Asbreuk, C. H., Cox, J. J., Chen, H., Johnson, R. L.,
Burbach, J. P., et al. (2000). A second independent pathway for
development of mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons requires
Lmx1b. Nature Neuroscience, 3(4), 337–341, April.
Storch, A., Sabolek, M., Milosevic, J., Schwarz, S. C., Schwarz, J.
(2004). Midbrain-derived neural stem cells: From basic science
to therapeutic approaches. Cell and Tissue Research (July 29).

946

S.J. Chinta, J.K. Andersen / The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 37 (2005) 942–946

Wallen, A., & Perlmann, T. (2003). Transcriptional control of
dopamine neuron development. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences, 991, 48–60, June.
Wise, R. A. (2004). Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 5(6), 483–494, June.

Zetterstrom, R. H., Solomin, L., Jansson, L., Hoffer, B. J., Olson, L., Perlmann, T., et al. (1997). Dopamine neuron agenesis in Nurr1-deficient mice. Science, 276(5310), 248–250,
April 11.

