[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Review Article
Ajay Francis Christopher,
Raman Preet Kaur,
Gunpreet Kaur,
Amandeep Kaur,
Vikas Gupta, Parveen Bansal
Division of Clinical Research,
University Centre of Excellence in
Research, Baba Farid University of
Health Science, Faridkot, Punjab, India

MicroRNA therapeutics: Discovering
novel targets and developing specific
therapy

Address for correspondence:
Dr. Parveen Bansal,
Division of Clinical Research,
University Centre of Excellence in
Research, Baba Farid University of
Health Science, Faridkot ‑ 151 203,
Punjab, India.
E‑mail: bansal66@yahoo.com

Ab stract

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules that regulate gene expression in
diverse biological process. They act as intracellular mediators that are necessary for various
biological processes. MicroRNAs targeting pathways of human disease provide a new and
potential powerful candidate for therapeutic intervention against various pathological conditions.
Even though, the information about miRNA biology has significantly enriched but we still do
not completely understand the mechanism of miRNA gene regulation. Various groups across
the globe and pharmaceutical companies are conducting research and developments to explore
miRNA based therapy and build a whole new area of miroRNA therapeutics. Consequently,
few miRNAs have entered the preclinical and clinical stage and soon might be available in the
market for use in humans.
Key words: Clinical stage, gene expression, microRNA, therapeutics

INTRODUCTION
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that
are approximately 20–25 nucleotides in length. They
regulate the expression of multiple target genes through
sequence‑specific hybridization to the 3′ untranslated
region (UTR) of messenger RNAs. These microRNAs
block the translation or they can cause direct degradation
of their target messenger RNAs. miRNAs do not require
perfect complementarity for target recognition, so a single
miRNA is responsible for the regulation of multiple
Website:

This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 3.0 License, which allows
others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as the
author is credited and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.

www.picronline.org

For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com

Access this article online
Quick Response Code:

messenger RNAs. Although miRNAs exert slight effects on
each individual messenger RNA target, the combined effect
is significant and produces measurable phenotypic results.
miRNAs play integral roles in several biological processes,
including immune modulation, metabolic control, neuronal
development, cell cycle, muscle differentiation, and stem
cell differentiation. Most miRNAs are conserved across
multiple animal species, indicating the evolutionary
importance of these molecules as modulators of critical
biological pathways and processes.

DOI:
10.4103/2229-3485.179431

How to cite this article: Christopher AF, Kaur RP, Kaur G, Kaur A,
Gupta V, Bansal P. MicroRNA therapeutics: Discovering novel targets
and developing specific therapy. Perspect Clin Res 2016;7:68-74.

© 2016 Perspectives in Clinical Research | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow

68

[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Christopher, et al.: Developing microRNA as therapeutics

It has been seen that expressions of many miRNAs
are altered in different diseases. Some miRNAs are
overexpressed whereas some are underexpressed in a
particular disease giving rise to signature miRNA pattern.
With the discovery of miRNAs and its critical role
as regulators in various diseases, it is quiet relevant to
explore and understand the possibility of using miRNA as
therapeutic agents. Recent studies in animals and humans
conducted in different laboratories present data that
strengthen the candidature of miRNAs to establish the
candidature of miRNAs to establish as a novel class of
drugs, i.e., miRNA therapeutics.[1,2] The miRNAs possess
a unique characteristic which is very attractive in terms
of drug development, i.e.,. they are small, with known
sequences and are often conserved among species. Based
on antisense technology, very potent oligonucleotide
targeted against miRNA known as anti‑miR is being
developed. An ideal design for an active synthetic miRNA
is that it should bind to its respective targeted miRNA with
high affinity and specificity.
This review will focus on miRNA and its biogenesis,
importance in various diseases, the potential of using
miRNAs as a therapeutic modality, and finally an update
on the status of clinical trials.

HISTORY

so a single miRNA is able to regulate multiple mRNAs.
On average, a given miRNA can regulate several hundred
transcripts whose effector molecules function at various
sites within cellular pathways and networks. Consequently,
miRNAs are able to switch instantly between cellular
programs and are therefore often viewed as tiny master
regulators of the human genome.
The miRNAs are predicted using different approaches
such as experimental method, computational approach,
expressed sequence tag, and genomic survey sequence
analysis. However, only a few predicted miRNAs have
undergone validation experimentally. Computational
analysis indicates that the total number of miRNAs could
be more that 1% of total translated genes and more than
30% of protein‑coding genes may be targeted by miRNAs.
MicroRNA biogenesis

The miRNA genes are expressed in the cell nucleus. About
70% of the human miRNAs are transcribed from introns
and/or exons. A brief overview of miRNA biogenesis is
shown in Figure 1.
Association of microRNA with various diseases

miRNAs are becoming increasingly recognized as their
expressions are altered in different diseases such as cancer,

In 1993, first miRNA was discovered during a study on
gene Lin‑4 of Caenorhabditis elegans.[3] It was seen after the
isolation of Lin‑4 that the gene encodes a protein that
binds to 3′ UTR of Lin‑14 mRNA and hence prevents
translation of Lin‑14. In 2000, second small RNA let‑7 was
discovered; it repressed Lin‑4 mRNA to promote a later
developmental transition in C. elegans.[4] Subsequently, it was
discovered that lin‑4 and let‑7 were found in Drosophila and
human cells, respectively. Most of the RNAs of this class
resembled the Lin-4 and let-7 RNAs, however they had
no role in regulating the timing of development thereby
suggesting that most of miRNAs were involved in other
types of regulatory pathways. Following this, the term
“miRNA” to refer to this class of small regulatory RNAs
came into existence.
MicroRNAs: Tiny master regulators

The miRNAs are known to be expressed in most
organisms from plant to vertebrates (including viruses)
and are conserved in all organisms. They regulate gene
expression by either degrading or making the targeted
mRNAs “silence” rendering their translation into proteins.
The miRNAs regulate gene expressions, which affect
various biological processes such as cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, and motility. The miRNAs do not
require perfect complementarity for target recognition,
69

Figure 1: Schematic overview of microRNA biogenesis

Perspectives in Clinical Research | April-June 2016 | Vol 7 | Issue 2

[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Christopher, et al.: Developing microRNA as therapeutics

hepatitis C infection, myocardial infarction, and metabolic
disease. Some miRNAs are overexpressed whereas some
are underexpressed in a particular disease giving rise to a
signature miRNA pattern. In case of tumors, the miRNAs
which are overexpressed may be considered as oncogenes
and are called “oncomirs.”[5] They are considered to
be involved in tumor development by reciprocally
inhibiting tumor suppressor genes (genes that control cell
differentiation and apoptosis), for example, miR‑17–192
is significantly overexpressed in lung cancer and several
other lymphomas. On the other hand, expression of some
miRNAs (tumor suppressor) is lower in cancerous cells and
usually prevents tumor development by negatively inhibiting
oncogenes, for example, let‑7 is a tumor suppressor miRNA
and aberrant expression of let‑7 results in oncogenic loss
of differentiation.[6] An overview of the association of
signature miRNA with some disease condition is given in
Table 1. The signature miRNAs associated with disease are
discussed in the following sections.

viral translation and replication. The binding site in the 5′
end of HCV genome provided the evidence of the direct
role of miR‑122 into HCV replication.[7,8]
MiR‑33a in metabolic disease

miR‑33a targets genes involved in cholesterol export such
as the adenosine triphosphate‑binding cassette (ABC)
transporters ABCA1 and ABCG1 and the endolysosomal
transport protein Niemann‑Pick C1 (Npc1). In agreement
with the regulation of ABCA1 by miR‑33, modulation
of miR‑33a levels results in encompassing effects in
cholesterol efflux in macrophages thus suggesting that
miR‑33 may participate in the regulation of high‑density
lipoprotein (HDL) levels in vivo. Indeed, three independent
studies have demonstrated that endogenous inhibition
of miR‑33 using different strategies leads to a significant
increase in hepatic ABCA1 expression and plasma HDL
levels, and these findings were later confirmed in the
miR‑33 knockout mice.[9]
MiR‑155 in inflammatory disease

MiR‑122 in hepatitis C virus

MiR‑122 is the most commonly found miRNA in the
adult liver and plays a key role in liver biology that includes
development, differentiation, homeostasis, and functions.
It controls the metabolism, i.e., cholesterol biosynthesis.
miR‑122 is involved in the replication of hepatitis C
virus (HCV). It binds to the viral genome and enhances

miR‑155 is overexpressed in atopic dermatitis and
contributes to chronic skin inflammation by increasing
the proliferative response of T‑helper cells through the
downregulation of cytotoxic T‑lymphocyte antigen‑4.[10]
In autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis,
miR‑155 showed higher expression in patients’ tissues
and synovial fibroblasts.[11] In multiple sclerosis, increased

Table 1: Differentially expressed microRNAs (signature microRNAs) in various diseases
Disease

Signature miRNA

Role

Hepatitis C
Heart failure
Inflammatory disease
Cardiac fibrosis
Neoangiogenesis
Metabolic disease

miR‑122
miR‑208
miR‑155
miR‑21
miR‑92a
miR‑33a

Myeloproliferative disease
Cardiac injury
HCC
Cancer

miR‑451
miR‑15
miR‑21
Let‑7

Glioblastoma

miR‑10b

Atherosclerosis

miR‑33

Vascular disease

miR‑145

Peripheral artery disease

miR‑92

Kidney fibrosis

miR‑21

Replication of HCV
Necessary for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy
miR‑155 regulates T‑cell differentiation by regulating cytokine production
Promotes fibroblast survival and growth factor secretion
Negative regulator of endothelial cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and vascular repair
Regulates pathways controlling three of the risk factors of metabolic syndrome,
namely levels of HDL, triglycerides, and insulin signaling
Upregulated during terminal erythroid differentiation and maturation
Upregulated in response to ischemic damage
Regulate MAP2K3 in HCC pathogenesis
Downregulated in several cancers and acts as a tumor suppressor and a regulator
of terminal differentiation and apoptosis
miRNA not expressed in human brain and strongly upregulated in both low‑grade
and density‑grade gliomas
Regulates HDL biogenesis and RCT via posttranscriptional repression of cholesterol
efflux genes (ABCA1, ABCG1, Npc1). ABCA1 mediates the transport of cholesterol
from peripheral tissues to apolipoprotein‑1 and it is also important in the RCT
pathway, where cholesterol is delivered from peripheral tissue to the liver, where it
can be excreted into bile or converted to bile acids prior to excretion
Specific for VSMCs and determine the phenotype of VSMCs. miR‑145 levels
increase and are released into the plasma in response to vascular injury
Overexpressed during ischemic injury, which in turn blocks angiogenesis and vessel
formation
Anti‑apoptotic and that apoptosis leads to loss of tubular epithelial cells, decreased
re‑epithelialization, and sustained inflammation, thereby promoting kidney interstitial
fibrosis

miRNA=MicroRNAs, RCT=Reverse cholesterol transport, ABC=Adenosine triphosphate‑binding cassette, Npc1=Niemann‑Pick C1, VSMCs=Vascular smooth muscle cells,
HDL=High‑density lipoprotein, HCC=Hepatocellular carcinoma, HCV=HCV=Hepatitis C virus

Perspectives in Clinical Research | April-June 2016 | Vol 7 | Issue 2

70

[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Christopher, et al.: Developing microRNA as therapeutics

expression of miR‑155 has also been measured in
peripheral and central nervous system‑resident myeloid
cells, including circulating blood monocytes and activated
microglia. Overexpression of miR‑155 leads to chronic
inflammatory state in human.
MiR‑10b in glioblastoma

The levels of miR‑10b are upregulated in human
glioblastoma tissues, glioblastoma cell, and stem cell lines
as compared to normal human tissues or astrocytes[12]
Inhibition of miR‑10b inhibits glioblastoma proliferation,
reduces cell invasion, and migration in glioblastoma cell
and stem cell lines whereas overexpression of miR‑10b
induced cell migration and invasion.
MiR‑33 in atherosclerosis

Plasma HDL levels have a protective role in atherosclerosis.
miR‑33, an intronic miRNA located within the SREBF2
gene, suppresses the expression of the cholesterol
transporter ABC transporter A1 (ABCA1) and lowers HDL
levels. Conversely, mechanisms that inhibit miR‑33 increase
ABCA1 and circulating HDL levels, suggesting that
antagonism of miR‑33 may be atheroprotective. In a study,
mice deficient for the low-density lipoprotein receptor
(LDLr–/– mice), with established atherosclerotic plaques
treated with anti‑miR33 for 4 weeks, showed an increase
in circulating HDL levels and enhanced reverse cholesterol
transport to the plasma, liver, and feces.[13] Consistent
with this, anti‑miR33‑treated mice showed reductions in
plaque size and lipid content, increased markers of plaque
stability, and decreased inflammatory gene expression.
Notably, in addition to raising ABCA1 levels in the liver,
anti‑miR33 oligonucleotides directly targeted the plaque
macrophages, in which they enhanced ABCA1 expression
and cholesterol removal. Thus, raising HDL levels by
anti‑miR33 oligonucleotide treatment promotes reverse
cholesterol transport and atherosclerosis regression.
MiR‑21 in hepatocellular carcinoma

Deregulated expressions of several miRNAs were found to
correlate with the pathologic and clinical characteristics of
hepatocellular carcinoma HCC.[14] The miRNA microarray
analysis has revealed that miR‑21 was dramatically elevated
in HCC tumor cells, with significant reductions of the

expressions of several tumor suppressor genes, including
PTEN, PDCD4, RECK, and TPM1 (PTEN).[15] MAP2K3
has also been identified as a novel direct target of miR‑21.
The study of loss‑of‑function of miR‑21 by transduction
of miR‑21 sponge in HepG2 cells indicated that miR‑21
might regulate cell proliferation, apoptosis, and invasiveness
partially by targeting MAP2K3.
MicroRNA as therapeutic target and tool

The expression of miRNAs is altered in various diseases
and it is now feasible to manipulate miRNA expression by
injecting miRNAs similar to the use of antisense mRNAs
and RNAi (widely used techniques for investigating gene
function and in gene therapy).[16] As the activation of
oncogenes could cause cancer, artificial antisense miRNAs
could be synthesized and employed to block their targeted
oncomirs to prevent the formation of cancer. However,
various critical prerequisite data must be available, for
example, identification of signature miRNAs, their
mechanism of action, applicability by RNAi, delivery of
miRNAs, and their active form in vivo. Once this information
is available, miRNA will have a bright future and become
a novel therapeutic tool. The process of building miRNA
therapeutics is similar to drug discovery and development.
Following steps are involved in the discovery and
development of miRNA therapeutics [Figure 2]:
•
•
•

•

Identification of signature miRNA (done by miRNA
profiling in disease)
Validation of signature miRNA (loss/gain of function
studies in vitro and in animal models)
Pharmacological analysis (in vivo miRNA delivery studies,
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics, (absorption,
distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity
studies)
Clinical trials (studies on the evaluation of efficacy and
safety).

Strategies for microRNA manipulation

There are two main strategies to manipulate miRNAs which
are dependent on whether the targeted miRNA expression
needs to be downregulated or to re‑introduce miRNAs
function to restore loss of function. The strategies for
miRNA manipulation are summarized in Table 2.

Figure 2: Process of microRNA discovery and development

71

Perspectives in Clinical Research | April-June 2016 | Vol 7 | Issue 2

[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Christopher, et al.: Developing microRNA as therapeutics

Antisense inhibition of mature microRNA (inhibiting
oncomirs)

The miRNA antagonists are oligonucleotides containing
the complementary sequences of endogenous miRNAs.
Antisense oligonucleotide (AMO), also called antagomir,
is the most commonly used anti‑miRNA antisense
oligomer.[2] The locked nucleic acid possess stronger
affinity to targeted miRNA, more resistant to nucleases,
and have lower toxicity. The peptide nucleic acid (PNA) is
an artificial synthesized peptide‑structured polymer and is
similar to DNA and RNA. The PNA binds the targeted
nucleotide more tightly than the nucleotide/nucleotide
binding, are relatively stable, have low toxicity, and could
be administered systematically.[17] The latest new strategy
Table 2: Various microRNAs‑based therapeutic
strategies investigated in cancer
Strategy

miRNA modulation/over
expression

Cancer

miRNA
inhibition

LNA-anti-miR-135
Anti-miR-21/anti-miR-155/
anti-miR-17-5p/anti-miR-1/
anti-miR-133 AMO
Anti-miR-221-AMO
AntagomiR-17-5p
Anti-oncomirs miR-143/miR145/liposome complexes
miR-145/PU-PEI complexes
Nucelolin-miR-122-aptamer
scFV antibody couples to
miR-34a nanoparticle
miR-34a mimic
miR-33a/PEI and miR-145/
PEI complexes

Lymphoma
Breast cancer

miRNA
replacement

Liver cancer
Neuroblastoma
Colorectal
cancer
Glioblastoma
Brain cancer
Lung cancer
Colon cancer
Colon cancer

miRNAs=MicroRNAs, LNA=Locked nucleic acid, AMO=Anti-miRNA
oligonucleotides, PEI=Polyethylenimine

available is miRNA sponge and miRNA masking. The
miRNA sponge downregulates the targeted miRNA and
possesses multiple complementary sites to the targeted
miRNA,[18] whereas miRNA masking have complimentary
miRNA binding site in the 3′ UTR of the target mRNA
to inhibit competitively and decreases the activity of
endogenous miRNA. The various antisense inhibitors
employed for downregulating various miRNAs are depicted
in Table 3.
Replacement of microRNAs

In diseases such as cancer, expression levels of
downregulated miRNAs or altered miRNA could be
done using vector, overexpressing the targeted miRNA
or by the transfection of double‑stranded miRNAs.
Therefore, studies have been conducted by introducing
artificial double‑stranded miRNA (mimic of targeted
downregulated miRNA). For example, overexpression of
downregulated miR‑26a in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
in mouse liver resulted in inhibition of cancer proliferation
and initiation of apoptosis. Subsequently in another
study, the downregulated miR‑34a level was increased by
delivering artificial miR‑34a with NOV340 liposome in an
orthotopic model of HCC.[19] This resulted in significant
tumor reduction, prolonged survival, and disease protection
in animals.
Patent and clinical trial status of microRNA therapeutics

There is a great excitement regarding miRNA use as
therapeutic entities. In terms of scientific perspective,
miRNA represents a novel and an attractive target which
could manipulate the body functions. Consequently,
there has been considerable increase in the number

Table 3: Various methods available for the delivery of microRNAs
Method of delivery

Characteristics

Advantages

Anti‑miRNA
oligonucleotides
Modified AMOs
2’‑OMe

Sequence complementary to mature miRNAs

Extensively used to arrest miRNAs in in vitro and in vivo
experiments

2′‑O‑methyl modification

chemically more stable and more resistant to nucleases
than AMOs
Increases stability, efficiency, and specificity
More resistant to the endogenous nucleases, has stronger
affinity to the target nucleotide, and displays lower toxicity
Extensively used for systemic delivery
Block a whole family of related miRNAs but selective
isolation and blocking of cells containing targeted miRNA
Used for delivery of miRNA. Not much experimental data
available
Used to delivery miRNA systemically or locally for miRNA
replacement
Used for the delivery of miRNA

2’‑MOE
LNA

2′‑O‑methoxyethyl modification
2′-4′‑methylene modification

AAV
Sponges

Adenovirus‑associated vectors
Transcripts expressed from plasmids possessing
multiple tandem binding sites for targeted miRNAs
Plasmid having miRNA gene encapsulated in
liposome
Nanoscale particle

Plasmid
PEI‑mediated
CC9
Anti‑miR peptide
Peptide nucleic
acid

Nanoparticle with a tumor‑targeting and
penetrating bifunctional peptide
Artificial peptide structure polymer as a main
chain with similarity to DNA and RNA does not
have an organophosphate moiety

Binds to target nucleotide sequences more tightly than
nucleotide/nucleotide binding. Relatively stable and can
be administered systemically with relatively low toxicity

miRNAs=MicroRNAs, LNA=Locked nucleic acid, AMOs=Anti‑miRNA oligonucleotides, PEI=Polyethylenimine, AAV=Adeno‑associated virus

Perspectives in Clinical Research | April-June 2016 | Vol 7 | Issue 2

72

[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Christopher, et al.: Developing microRNA as therapeutics

Table 4: Overview of microRNAs therapeutics development status
Company

Targeted
miRNA

Diseases

Technology/
chemistry

Mechanism/effect

Stage

Regulus
Therapeutics

miR‑122

HCV infection

Anti‑miR

Block HCV infection

Preclinical

miR‑10b

Glioblastoma

Anti‑miR

Preclinical

miR‑221
miR‑21
miR‑33

HCC
Renal fibrosis
Atherosclerosis

Anti‑miR
Anti‑miR
Anti‑miR

miR‑122

HCV

Anti‑miR

miR‑34

Primary liver cancer
or solid cancers with
liver involvement
Hematological
malignancies
Peripheral artery
disease
Myocardial infarction

mimic

Reduces proliferation by blocking cell cycle progression
and triggering cell death
Delayed tumor progression resulting in a survival rate
Reducing the expression of extracellular matrix proteins
Regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid homeostasis
via decrease in very LDL triglycerides and an increase
in high‑density lipoprotein
Prolonged mean reductions in viral plasma RNA levels
from baseline
Reduction in the expression of oncogenes, tumor
regression, enhanced the survival, and inhibited the
growth of other nonhepatic tumors
Restores normal function and reduces the aberrant cell
proliferation
Enhances blood vessel growth and improves functional
recovery of damaged tissue
Reduces heart muscle cell death and promotes heart
muscle cell regeneration

Santaris
Pharma
Mirna
Therapeutics

miR‑155
miRagen
Therapeutics

miR‑92
miR‑15

Anti‑miR
Anti‑miR
Anti‑miR

Preclinical
Preclinical
Completed
preclinical
Phase IIa
Phase I
Completed
preclinical
Preclinical
Preclinical

miRNA=MicroRNAs, HCV=Hepatitis C virus, HCC=Hepatocellular carcinoma, LDL=Low‑density lipoprotein

of patent applications filed over the decade. The
annual number of US and European published patent
applications and issued patents related to miRNAs is
close to 500. A snapshot of the current development
status of miRNA‑based therapeutics is summarized in
Table 4.
Future perspectives of microRNA therapeutics

The functionality of miRNA in controlling diverse
gene expression in cancer and various other important
diseases makes miRNA an ideal candidate for therapeutic
applications. Recent data demonstrate that the miRNA
expression is altered in various human diseases and its
selective modulation through antisense inhibition or
replacement could significantly affect the prognosis
of a disease. With the technological advancement and
ease of administration of miRNA through local or
parenteral injection routes and its sufficient uptake in
the tissue without the need of developing formulation
gives miRNA therapeutics an extra edge. We hope
that with increasing research and development on
miRNA, increase in the filed patents and increased
attention and interest of the biotechnology companies
in miRNA‑based therapeutics would follow suit. This
promises the availability of miRNA therapeutics in the
market in the coming years for the treatment of various
diseases.
Financial support and sponsorship

Nil.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts of interest.
73

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

Bader AG, Brown D, Winkler M. The promise of microRNA
replacement therapy. Cancer Res 2010;70:7027‑30.
Czech MP. MicroRNAs as therapeutic targets. N Engl J Med
2006;354:1194‑5.
Lee RC, Feinbaum RL, Ambros V. The C. elegans heterochronic gene
lin‑4 encodes small RNAs with antisense complementarity to lin‑14.
Cell 1993;75:843‑54.
Reinhart BJ, Slack FJ, Basson M, Pasquinelli AE, Bettinger JC,
Rougvie AE, et al. The 21‑nucleotide let‑7 RNA regulates
developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature
2000;403:901‑6.
Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez‑Saavedra E, Lamb J, Peck D, et al.
MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers. Nature
2005;435:834‑8.
Johnson SM, Grosshans H, Shingara J, Byrom M, Jarvis R,
Cheng A, et al. RAS is regulated by the let‑7 microRNA family. Cell
2005;120:635‑47.
Jopling CL, Schütz S, Sarnow P. Position‑dependent function for a
tandem microRNA miR‑122‑binding site located in the hepatitis C
virus RNA genome. Cell Host Microbe 2008;4:77‑85.
Jopling CL, Yi M, Lancaster AM, Lemon SM, Sarnow P. Modulation
of hepatitis C virus RNA abundance by a liver‑specific MicroRNA.
Science 2005;309:1577‑81.
Marquart TJ, Allen RM, Ory DS, Baldán A. miR‑33 links SREBP‑2
induction to repression of sterol transporters. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 2010;107:12228‑32.
Dorsett Y, McBride KM, Jankovic M, Gazumyan A, Thai TH,
Robbiani DF, et al. MicroRNA‑155 suppresses activation‑induced
cytidine deaminase‑mediated Myc‑Igh translocation. Immunity
2008;28:630‑8.
Li X, Tian F, Wang F. Rheumatoid arthritis‑associated microRNA‑155
targets SOCS1 and upregulates TNF‑a and IL‑1ß in PBMCs. Int J Mol
Sci 2013;14:23910‑21.
Guessous F, Alvarado‑Velez M, Marcinkiewicz L, Zhang Y, Kim J,
Heister S, et al. Oncogenic effects of miR‑10b in glioblastoma stem
cells. J Neurooncol 2013;112:153‑63.
Rayner KJ, Sheedy FJ, Esau CC, Hussain FN, Temel RE, Parathath S,
et al. Antagonism of miR‑33 in mice promotes reverse cholesterol
transport and regression of atherosclerosis. J Clin Invest
2011;121:2921‑31.

Perspectives in Clinical Research | April-June 2016 | Vol 7 | Issue 2

[Downloaded free from http://www.picronline.org on Saturday, July 28, 2018, IP: 69.249.191.95]

Christopher, et al.: Developing microRNA as therapeutics
14.
15.

16.

Aravalli RN. Development of MicroRNA Therapeutics for
hepatocellular carcinoma. Diagnostics (Basel) 2013;3:170‑91.
Xu J, Wu C, Che X, Wang L, Yu D, Zhang T, et al. Circulating
microRNAs, miR‑21, miR‑122, and miR‑223, in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma or chronic hepatitis. Mol Carcinog
2011;50:136‑42.
Vidal L, Blagden S, Attard G, de Bono J. Making sense of antisense.
Eur J Cancer 2005;41:2812‑8.

Perspectives in Clinical Research | April-June 2016 | Vol 7 | Issue 2

17.
18.
19.

Fabani MM, Abreu‑Goodger C, Williams D, Lyons PA, Torres AG,
Smith KG, et al. Efficient inhibition of miR‑155 function in vivo by
peptide nucleic acids. Nucleic Acids Res 2010;38:4466‑75.
Lee JB, Hong J, Bonner DK, Poon Z, Hammond PT. Self‑assembled
RNA interference microsponges for efficient siRNA delivery. Nat
Mater 2012;11:316‑22.
Bader AG. miR‑34 – A microRNA replacement therapy is headed to
the clinic. Front Genet 2012;3:120.

74

