British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology

DOI:10.1111/bcp.12065

A next step in
adeno-associated
virus-mediated gene therapy
for neurological diseases:
regulation and targeting

Correspondence
Liliane Tenenbaum, Laboratory of Cellular
and Molecular Neurotherapy, Department
of Clinical Neuroscience. Lausanne
University Hospital, Switzerland.
Tel.: +412 1314 1048
Fax: +412 1314 0824
E-mail: liliane.tenenbaum@chuv.ch
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Keywords
adeno-associated virus, gene therapy,
Parkinson’s disease, lysosomal storage
diseases, leukodystrophies,
tetracycline-inducible transcription
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Received

Abdelwahed Chtarto,1,2 Olivier Bockstael,1,2 Terence Tshibangu,3

9 October 2012

Olivier Dewitte,1,2 Marc Levivier3 & Liliane Tenenbaum3

Accepted
7 December 2012

1

Laboratory of Experimental Neurosurgery and 2Multidisciplinary Research Institute (I.R.I.B.H.M.), Free
University of Brussels (ULB), Brussels, Belgium and 3Department of Clinical Neuroscience, CHUV,
Lausanne, Switzerland

Accepted Article
Published Online
18 January 2013

Recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors mediating long term transgene expression are excellent gene therapy tools for
chronic neurological diseases. While rAAV2 was the first serotype tested in the clinics, more efficient vectors derived from the rh10
serotype are currently being evaluated and other serotypes are likely to be tested in the near future. In addition, aside from the
currently used stereotaxy-guided intraparenchymal delivery, new techniques for global brain transduction (by intravenous or
intra-cerebrospinal injections) are very promising.
Various strategies for therapeutic gene delivery to the central nervous system have been explored in human clinical trials in the past
decade. Canavan disease, a genetic disease caused by an enzymatic deficiency, was the first to be approved. Three gene transfer
paradigms for Parkinson’s disease have been explored: converting L-dopa into dopamine through AADC gene delivery in the putamen;
synthesizing GABA through GAD gene delivery in the overactive subthalamic nucleus and providing neurotrophic support through
neurturin gene delivery in the nigro-striatal pathway.
These pioneer clinical trials demonstrated the safety and tolerability of rAAV delivery in the human brain at moderate doses.
Therapeutic effects however, were modest, emphasizing the need for higher doses of the therapeutic transgene product which could
be achieved using more efficient vectors or expression cassettes. This will require re-addressing pharmacological aspects, with attention
to which cases require either localized and cell-type specific expression or efficient brain-wide transgene expression, and when it is
necessary to modulate or terminate the administration of transgene product. The ongoing development of targeted and regulated
rAAV vectors is described.

Introduction
AAV vectors in the central nervous system
The isolation of a molecular clone of adeno-associated
virus (AAV) serotype 2 into the pBR322 plasmid by Samulski et al. in 1982 opened the door for the genetic analysis of
this virus [1, 2]. The origin of replication, consisting of the
two 145-nucleotide non-coding extremities (the inverted
terminal repeats or ITRs) of the viral genome was shown to
be the only cis-acting element needed for replication and
encapsidation of the viral DNA and for rescue from plasmids. This discovery enabled the generation of recom© 2013 The Authors
British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology © 2013 The British Pharmacological Society

binant AAV (rAAV) vectors through the cloning of
heterologous genes instead of the AAV genes between the
ITRs. Recombinant viral particles are then produced by
providing AAV genes and some helper adenoviral genes
in trans [3–6].
rAAV vectors are excellent tools in gene therapy for
treatment of neurological diseases as they transduce postmitotic cells [7–9] that mediate the sustained, long term
gene expression [10, 11] that is required to treat chronic
diseases. rAAV serotype 2 was the first discovered serotype
and is still the best understood but vectors derived
from several other human or simian serotypes have
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

217–232

/

217

A. Chtarto et al.

demonstrated both a higher efficiency and a wider distribution of transgene expression in the central nervous
system (CNS) [12–14].
rAAV vectors have an excellent safety profile [15]. First,
they elicit only low titre and transient neutralizing antibodies and no inflammation when administered in the brain
[10, 16]. Given the high seropositivity for AAV in the human
population, this immune response against rAAV in the
presence of circulating anti-AAV antibodies [17, 18], is a
particularly important issue [19]. It has been demonstrated
recently that after intraparenchymal injections into the
CNS, transgene expression is unaffected in immuneprimed mice harbouring physiologically-relevant antiAAV2 antibodies levels [20]. Notably, there are significant
differences in the immune responses towards the different
AAV serotypes in the human population. In particular,
healthy donors present lower antibody titres against AAV5,
AAV8 and AAV9 as compared with AAV2 and AAV1 [21]. In
one study, however, probably due to the infection of
antigen-presenting cells in the brain, high titre rAAV9
encoding non-self proteins elicited a strong cell-mediated
and humoral immune response accompanied by a prominent inflammation [22]. Therefore, when using rAAV9
encoding non-human proteins (such as engineered
transasctivators; see below), the immune and inflammatory responses should be carefully evaluated. In addition,
caution should be taken when interpreting data of rAAV9mediated transfer of human cDNAs in animal models.
Another risk, albeit a rare one, is vector DNA integration, a rare event resulting in a low risk of inadvertent oncogene activation [23]. Despite the increasing number of
long term studies in rodents and non-human primates,
none has reported a deleterious DNA integration event in
the brain [24]. In fact, increased tumour rates, clearly
related to the vector, have only been evidenced in a particular tumour prone model in the liver after a partial hepatectomy, both of which conditions artificially increase cell
proliferation and DNA rearrangements [25].
After intraparenchymal delivery, rAAV vectors target
mainly neurons in addition to a low percentage of glial
cells depending on the transcriptional regulatory elements [26, 27], the region [28, 29], the serotype [30] and the
mode of delivery [31–34]. In a recent report, though, in
striking contrast with previous studies [14, 34, 35], rAAV9
intrastriatal delivery has been shown to mediate transgene
expression equally efficiently in astrocytes and neurons
[22]. It should be noted, however, that the volume of virus
injected by Ciesielska et al. (i.e. 10 ml) was 5-fold higher and
the infusion speed 2.5-fold higher than in the other
studies, conditions which might affect the transduction
pattern [36].
The advent of new techniques for global brain transduction has opened new doors for the treatment of CNS
diseases. These consist of injecting the virus intravenously
exploiting the trans-blood-brain barrier delivery of rAAV9
[31, 32, 37, 38] or injecting it into the cerebrospinal fluid
218

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

(CSF) via the cisterna magna [39]. With these new delivery
modes, however, the immune and inflammatory responses
to the vectors need to be revisited. In particular, it has been
reported that even a low neutralizing antibody titre in the
blood of non-human primates abrogated transduction
after intravenous delivery of rAAV9 [40]. Infusion of rAAV9
into the CSF via the cisterna magna led to dramatically
stronger expression of the transgene and a wider distribution of gene transfer throughout the brain but, as with
intravenous injection, a significant pre-existing anti-AAV
antibody titre abrogated brain transduction [33].

Gene therapy clinical trials in the CNS
with AAV
Various strategies for therapeutic gene delivery to the CNS
have been explored in pre-clinical studies and in the past
decade in human clinical trials. We will only illustrate the
main strategies which have reached the clinics. More
extensive reviews on rAAV-mediated gene transfer in the
CNS have been published recently [9, 16, 41].
Canavan disease (CD), is a leukodystrophy caused by
genetic mutations of the aspartoacylase (ASPA) gene, a
metabolic enzyme restricted in the CNS to oligodendrocytes and it was the first disorder to be approved for AAV
gene therapy in the CNS [42, 43]. ASPA deficiency results
in accumulation of N-acetyl-aspartate in oligodendrocytes and subsequent hypomyelination/dysmyelination.
Although the first clinical trial testing rAAV therapy on CD
demonstrated no therapeutic effect, it did demonstrate
the safety and tolerability of rAAV2 vectors delivery to the
brain. In a subset (3/10) of CD subjects, low to moderate
levels of AAV neutralizing antibody with respect to baseline but, no increased inflammation or cellular immune
response were reported [44]. These data suggest that, at
the dose used (1 ¥ 1012 vector genomes (vg) per patient)
and with intraparenchymal administration, the approach is
relatively safe. Potential explanations for the lack of therapeutic effect are the low efficiency and restricted distribution of rAAV2-mediated transgene expression and the
absence of transgene expression in oligodendrocytes. Correction of lysosomal enzyme deficiencies has also generated promising data [45].
Late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (Batten
disease) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder that results in progressive neurological degeneration. The disease is caused by mutations in the CLN2 gene
encoding a lysosomal tripeptidyl-peptidase whose deficiency causes accumulation of proteins in lysosomes of
neurons leading to neuronal cell death. A rAAV2 vector
expressing the human CLN2 cDNA was administered to 12
locations in the CNS of 10 children, enrolled in a phase I
clinical trial for Batten disease. Although this trial was not
double-blind and randomized, the data suggested, on the
basis of a neurologic rating scale, that the rate of decline
was significantly reduced in treated patients [46]. On the
basis of promising preclinical studies [47], another clinical

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

trial using the more efficient AAVrh10 serotype has been
launched (http://www.abedia.com/wiley/record_detail.
php?ID=1717).
Mucopolysaccharidosis type III (MPSIII), a disorder
caused by the absence of one of the lysosomal enzymes
required for the degradation of heparan sulfate (HS)
which results in the accumulation of heparan sulfate
oligosaccharides (HSOs), is also an interesting target
for rAAV-mediated gene therapy. In MPSIIIB, a-Nacetylglucosaminidase (NaGlu) deficiency in particular is
responsible for progressive mental neurodegeneration.
Intracerebral stereotactic injections of AAV5 vectors
coding for the missing enzyme reversed alterations of HS
degradation, corrected pathology in neuronal cells and
prevented neuroinflammation at the organ level in animal
models [48]. Recently, a clinical trial using a rAAVrh10
vector has been launched for MPSIIIA, a deficiency in
heparan-N-sulfamidase (http://www.abedia.com/wiley/
record_detail.php?ID=318).
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is also a good candidate for
gene therapy since the main symptoms are caused by the
progressive degeneration of a specific neuron population,
the nigro-striatal dopaminergic (DA) neurons, located in a
precise brain area, leading to the cardinal motor symptoms, bradykinesia, rigidity and tremor. Thanks to the discovery of the important role of dopamine depletion in PD,
a breakthrough in the pharmacological treatment of PD
was made in the 1960s, in the form of the oral administration of L-dopa, the precursor to dopamine [49]. Exogenous
L-dopa is taken up into the remaining functional DA
neurons where it is converted into dopamine by aromatic
acid decarboxylase (AADC). With the ongoing loss of
DA neurons, though, the uptake of extracellular L-dopa
declines and increasing doses of L-dopa need to be administered leading to important fluctuations (e.g. peak dose
dyskinesias). Continuous delivery of L-dopa directly to the
striatum via gene therapy could be a significant improvement because L-dopa would reach only the clinically relevant target area [50]. A rAAV2 vector expressing AADC has
been injected into the putamen of patients with PD in an
attempt to reduce and stabilize the L-dopa dose necessary
to alleviate the symptoms [51].This combined treatment is
predicted to provide more stable dopamine concentrations in the long term than oral L-dopa treatment alone
since AAV2-hAADC therapy results in expression of AADC
in non-degenerating putaminal neurons [52], in contrast
to nigral neurons that express endogenous AADC. Ten
patients received bilateral intraputaminal infusions of two
different doses of rAAV2-AADC (9 ¥ 1010 and 3 ¥ 1011 vg).
Data based on PET imaging using an AADC-specific tracer
[51], fluoro-L-tyrosine [53], demonstrated stable transgene
expression over 4 years confirming the preclinical data on
the longevity of rAAV-mediated transgene expression [11].
This clinical trial further confirmed the safety and tolerability of rAAV intracerebral administration [54] but emphasized the need for a higher vector dose. The data showed

dose-dependent improvements but even in the high dose
group in which the Unified Parkinson’s disease Rating
Scale (UPDRS) improved in all patients in the first 12
months, a slow deterioration was observed in subsequent
years [53].
The motor abnormalities in PD are due to the overactivity of major output nuclei of the motor loop caused by
the lack of dopamine in the striatum. Controlled inhibition
of these excessively active nuclei can restore a normalized
output to the cortex. Consistently, inhibiting the activity of
the subthalamic nucleus (STN) by implanting adjustable
electrodes provided impressive and immediate reversal of
symptoms [55]. Using a similar paradigm, a rAAV2 vector
expressing glutamic acid decarboxylase, the enzyme that
synthesizes the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA was
injected in the STN. In preclinical studies, the vector transduced excitatory glutamatergic neurons which became
inhibitory, thereby reducing the STN activity [56]. A phase I
clinical trial demonstrated safety and tolerability of rAAV2
injections into the STN. Furthermore, 10 of 12 patients
showed improvements in UPDRS at 12 months [57]. A subsequent double-blind sham-surgery controlled trial involving 16 patients injected with AAV2-GAD and 21 receiving
control sham-surgery, confirmed the UPDRS improvements [58]. In this study, in which 23 controls and 22
treated patients were originally enrolled, in order to reinforce the statistical relevance of the data, the authors
excluded from the analysis, the individuals for which identified technical failures occurred during the surgery.
However effective, these therapeutic strategies might be,
though, they are only compensatory and are not expected
to interfere with DA neuron cell death.
Providing neurotrophic support might constitute the
first disease-interfering approach for PD. Glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its analogue neurturin (NTN) were shown to protect, and even in some
instances, restore DA neurons in most animal models
(with the exception of alpha-synuclein overexpression
[59]. Viral vectors expressing GDNF or NTN have been
delivered in the striatum (Str) and the substantia nigra
(SN) individually, and in both concurrently. SN injections
were efficiently protecting DA cell bodies but did not
reverse motor symptoms due to the absence of enhanced
striatal DA re-innervation [60–62]. In contrast, striatal
injections protected both terminals and cell bodies and
improved symptoms [61, 63, 64]. The fact that GDNF can
be retrogradely transported from the striatum to the substantia nigra pars compacta [65] provides an interpretation for this observation.
A rAAV2 vector expressing NTN is currently being
evaluated in phase II clinical trials [66]. In a first trial, the
virus was injected in the putamen (5.4 ¥ 1011 vg per
patient). At 12 months post-surgery, no statistical improvement in the UPDRS parameters could be established but in
a subset of patients reaching 18 months post-surgery,
several parameters were significantly improved [67, 68].For
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

219

A. Chtarto et al.

two patients, post-mortem analysis revealed that NTN
covered approximately 15% of the putamen. Contrary to
data obtained with similar amounts of virus in monkey,
though, very few NTN-positive cells were detected in the
SN of the treated patients, suggesting a poor retrograde
transport of NTN [69]. It should be noted that the enrolled
patients were at a late stage of PD and that virus quantities
were very limited for safety reasons. A second clinical trial
has been launched using both putamen and SN as delivery
areas (as in Kordower’s pioneer study, [63]) as well as a
higher virus dose (2.4 ¥ 1012 vg per patient). Several
preclinical [70–72] studies have described adverse effects
related to uncontrolled dosage and off-target delivery of
GDNF. In addition, a clinical trial using minipumps to
deliver recombinant GDNF protein in patients’ brain
was interrupted due to the appearance of antibodies
directed against GDNF [73]. Although none of these
adverse effects have beed described so far in the AAV2NTN gene therapy clinical trials, these observations raised
the issue of the pharmacological aspects of rAAVmediated gene delivery.
A variety of vectors are being designed and continuously improved to adapt to the needs of these very
diverse situations. In some cases, localized (e.g. GDNF)
and cell-type specific (e.g. GAD) expression is required
whereas in cases like MPSIII, brain-wide and efficient
transgene expression is a prerequisite to success. In some
cases, such as the correction of enzymatic deficiencies,
maximizing transgene expression is the ultimate goal
whereas in other cases, such as with many neuroprotective strategies, it will be necessary to regulate transgene
expression in order to adapt the dose of the transgene
product to the patient’s needs and eventually terminate
the treatment. The on-going development of better targeted and better regulated rAAV vectors is described in
the following sections.

Regulation of transgene expression
Several authors have reviewed the characteristics of an
adequate system to regulate gene expression by exogenous drugs [41, 74–76]. An ideal regulatory system should
harbour (i) a low basal activity in the uninduced state, (ii) a
high and inducer dose-dependent level of transgene
expression in the induced state, (iii) a rapid response to the
administration or removal of the inducer, (iv) a negligible
toxicity, inflammatory response or immunogenicity associated with the regulatory elements and (v) absence of toxicity and good bioavailability of the inducing drug. The
latter depends on the target organ and mode of administration of the drug. In this section, we will only review regulatable systems used to control gene expression into the
brain using rAAV vectors.
The constrained rAAV cloning capacity (~4.5 kb) limits
the choice of regulatable systems. Drug-regulatable
220

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

genetic systems usually comprise two elements: (i) an
inducible/repressible transcriptional promoter driving
the expression of the transgene and (ii) a geneticallyengineered transactivator composed of a DNA-binding
domain recognizing this promoter and interacting with
the inducer, and an activator domain interacting with the
cellular transcriptional machinery. Using two rAAV vectors
to incorporate these two components separately requires
that each cell is infected by both vectors at an optimal
stoichiometry which is difficult to achieve in vivo [77, 78].
This has implications for the efficiency of transgene
expression as the number of vector genomes rapidly
decreases with distance from the injection site [26, 79].
Consistently the area covered by GDNF was considerably
smaller despite a high vector dose (4.12 ¥ 1010 vg) when
using a dual-component regulated rAAV [78] compared
with a single regulatable vector [72, 80].
The Tet-system (Figure 1) is the most widely used technology for drug-dependent regulation of gene expression
in eukaryotes. Since its conception by Gossen & Bujard in
1992 [81], various improvements have been made to the
different components of the Tet-system.The Tet-Off system
(Figure 1A), the first developed Tet-regulatable version,
utilizes the Escherichia coli tetracycline-repressor (TetR)
protein fused to the activation domain of the herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV1) VP16 transcription factor [81].
Being derived from a non-modified form of the TetR
natural repressor, the Tet-Off system allows inhibition of
transgene expression at a low inducer dose and has a low
level of transgene expression in the non-induced state [72,
82]. However, the induction of expression in vivo is often
slow and asynchronous because it requires complete
removal of the inducer which depends on its half-life in the
target organ [82–85].The half-life of elimination of doxycycline (Dox), a tetracycline analogue widely used to control
the Tet-system, is about 3 days [86]. Improvements made to
the Tet-Off transactivator were focused on the VP16 activation domain to reduce its toxicity due to sequestering of
transcriptional cellular factors [87].
A reverse transactivator (rtTA) which, unlike the Tet-Off
system, responds to the presence of Dox by activating
transgene expression [88] has been obtained by modification of four amino acids of the TetR domain by random
mutagenesis, resulting in a ‘Tet-On’ version of the Tetsystem (Figure 1B). Modifications focused on the rtTA to
increase its performance involve introduction of a nuclear
localization signal [89, 90], codon usage optimization
[91–93], removal of potential splice sites [91] and mutated
activation domains [87, 91]. The most significant advances,
however, came from the use of molecular evolution to
identify improved rtTA mutants [94, 95].
Optimization of the cis-acting Tet-responsive promoter
could also improve the Tet-system. Several modifications
successfully reduced the basal activity of the Tet promoter [96–99]. Usually, though, the decrease of the basal
activity similarly affected the induced level of transgene

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

Figure 1
A) Tet-Off system: in the absence of doxycycline the tTA transactivator
binds to the tetO (tet operator) repeated sequence and activates transcription from the minimal promoter (PhCMVmini) of human cytomegalovirus (hCMV). B) Tet-On system: in the presence of doxycycline the rtTA
transactivator binds to the tetO repeated sequence and activates transcription from the minimal PhCMVmini promoter. Ptet is a fusion of seven
repeated tetO sequence (7 ¥ 42 pbs) and the PhCMVmini. The PhCMVmini. corresponds to the hCMV promoter without its enhancers sites. The (reverse)
transactivator (r) tTA is composed of the (reverse) Tetracycline Repressor
((r)TetR) of the Tn10 tetracycline resistance operon of Escherichia coli and
a portion of herpes simplex virus (HSV) protein 16 that functions as a
potent activator of transcription

expression. Interestingly, the latest developed Tetpromoter resulted in a low basal activity level while retaining a high activation potential [99].
Tet-regulatable rAAV vectors with different designs
have been proposed, in order to avoid interference with
the transcriptional activity of the AAV ITR [100] and/or with
the promoter used to express the Tet-transactivator [72,
101–105]. The size of the tetracycline-responsive cis elements and transactivator (2.1 kb) allows the inclusion of
many therapeutic and reporter genes with a size up to

2.4 kb. Single vectors carrying the entire Tet-Off cassette
have been used to regulate GFP [103–105] and GDNF [72]
in healthy rat brain. In the latter case, an adverse effect of
GDNF, weight loss, was shown to be tightly regulated by
Dox [72]. Manfredsson and collaborators reported that the
minimal Dox doses required to abrogate GDNF expression
was 40 mg Dox kg-1 diet (corresponding to 2.4 mg kg-1) in
SN and 100 mg Dox kg-1 diet (corresponding to 6 mg kg-1)
in the striatum. The corresponding Dox serum concentrations were at least 8-fold lower than concentrations
required for antimicrobial activity [106] and similar to
those currently used as an anti-inflammatory drug to treat
rosacea [107], suggesting that clinically-acceptable Dox
doses could be useful to regulate GDNF transgene expression in clinical trials.
Single rAAV using the Tet-On system were also
described [101, 108]. Using the rtTA2(S)M2 mutant developed by Urlinger, the quantity of Dox given to rats to
achieve a biological effect was 600 mg ml-1 in drinking
water, equivalent to 70 mg kg-1 for the GDNF transgene
[80, 108] (Figure 2) and 3 mg kg-1 for miRNA expression
[101].
The constant administration of antibiotics could lead to
complications such as increased tolerance to tetracyclines
or toxicity. Therefore, in order to minimize the period of
treatment, the choice of an adequate version of the Tetbased system, will rely on the disease to be treated and the
therapeutic strategy.
Due to the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the effective
inducer dose required for the biological effect of a transgene delivered into the brain is less feasible than for one
delivered to the peripheral organs. To overcome this difficulty, attempts have been made to optimize the genetic
components of the Tet system or to modify the transactivator to interact with inducers having better pharmacokinetic properties (in particular, crossing the BBB more
efficiently). The identification of alternative Tet system
inducers could (i) provide a better control of gene expression, (ii) avoid the effect of long term exposure to tetracyclines, i.e. selection of resistant bacteria and destabilization
of bowel flora [109] toxicity including phototoxicity and
accumulation in bones [110, 111] and (iii) improve bioavailability in the brain thanks to more efficient passage
through the BBB. Besides Dox, other tetracyclines are able
to induce the tTA and rtTA. Methacycline [112], has an
induction potency similar to Dox with a shorter half-life
[113] which is an advantage for faster clearance. Minocycline is also a good inducer for the tTA and some versions
of the rtTA [112, 114] and furthermore has the advantage
of being anti-inflammatory in the brain [115, 116].
4-epidoxycycline, a Dox metabolite without antibiotic
activity which can induce the Tet-system [117] could also
be an alternative. Chemically-modified tetracyclines (CMT)
devoid of antibiotic activity [110] are also interesting but
are not Tet-system inducers. Other inducers showing a
higher affinity for rtTA2(S)M2 [91] than Dox on the basis of
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

221

A. Chtarto et al.

Figure 2
Regulation of GDNF transgene expression mediated by a single AAVTet-On tetracycline-inducible vector in the striatum in a partial rat model
of PD. A single injection of rAAV2/1-Tet-On-GDNF (3.5 ¥ 108 vg/rat) was
performed in the rat striatum. One month later, a four injection site
6-hydroxydopamine lesion [61] was performed. Animals were continuously treated with doxycycline (A) (600 mg l-1 in drinking water) or
remained untreated (B) and were sacrified 1 month post-lesioning. Ten
microns coronal sections were labelled with anti-GDNF antibodies using
a peroxidase staining method [108]

structural analysis while keeping the ability of Dox to cross
the BBB have been discovered [118]. Finally, an alternative
strategy to stop transgene expression mediated by Tetinducible vectors rapidly when the inducer’s half-life is a
limiting factor, is GR 33076X [119] a tetracycline antagonist
able to bind competitively to the Tet transactivator.
Notably, GR 33076X is not antibiotic and is less toxic than
other tetracyclines [119, 120].
The main disadvantage of the Tet system currently limiting its clinical use is the immune response elicited by the
Tet transactivator. Indeed, after intramuscular delivery by
plasmid-, adenovirus- [121] or AAV-mediated expression
[122, 123] into non-human primates, a rapid loss of transgene expression correlating with a cellular immune
response has been described. However, the immune reactions in the brain, an immune-privileged site, could be
substantially less efficient than those in other organs [124–
222

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

126]. Indeed, tTA [127] and rtTA2(S)M2 do not elicit a striatal immune response even when rats are pre-immunized
[124]. However, the rodent immune system does not correlate directly with that of humans and the vast majority
of the human population (60%) has been exposed to
the herpes simplex virus [128]. They may thus have circulating antibodies against the VP16 portion of the tTA/rtTA,
which could block transgene expression. The use of
immunologically-humanized mice could help predict the
immune response to the Tet transactivator in patients.
Attempts to replace the viral VP16-derived activator
domain by the human p65 activation domain of the NFkB
complex, could help reducing the immunogenicity of the
Tet transactivator [129]. In this respect, the use of autoregulatory vectors avoiding permanent expression of Tettransactivators constitutes an improvement [102, 103, 130].
Epitope analysis and subsequent predictive design of new
less immunogenic transactivators could help to minimize
the deleterious effect of pre-existing HSV-1 seropositivity.
Another drug-inducible framework proposed for regulation of AAV-mediated transgene expression in the brain
is the rapamycin-inducible system [131]. However, until
now this dual-vector system provides transgene expression levels that are much lower than constitutive promoters [78].
Methods to regulate transgene products posttranscriptionally have also been proposed. Although still in
their infancy, it is worth citing: the regulation of protein
stability through the binding of a small ligand, trimethoprim, to a destabilizing domain [132].

Cell type specificity
Numerous AAV capsid variants, either naturally occuring
(serotypes) or laboratory-engineered (by random mutagenesis or rationally-designed modifications), have been
described [46, 47, 133–142]. Capsid motifs are the key
players in the interaction between viral particles and host
cells mediating primary receptor attachment, secondary
receptor-mediated cell entry and genome delivery to the
nucleus, and as such, rAAV capsid variants are expected to
differ in their cellular tropism. Interestingly, the variability
between different serotypes is not evenly distributed
along the capsid protein sequence but is higher in the
domains that are displayed at the surface [143]. Thanks to
the technology for trans-encapsidation of rAAV2 genomes
into other serotype capsids [144], comparison between
capsids without interferences due to the viral genome is
possible.
Numerous comparisons between serotypes were performed in the CNS of mice [13, 14, 145], rats [12, 34, 146],
cats [147] and non-human primates [148, 149]. The majority of the tested serotypes or variants tested in rodents,
mediate transgene expression mainly in neurons with the
exception of AAVrh43 and rAAV4 which transduce glial
cells [150] and ependymal cells [145] respectively, when
injected in the striatum. In contrast, in monkeys a high

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

proportion of reporter gene positive glial cells were
observed with rAAV5 [148] and rAAV1 [151].
In addition, different AAV serotypes transduce different
neuronal subtypes. For example, in the rat hippocampus,
rAAV2 targets dendate gyrus neurons whereas rAAV1 and
5 are more efficient in pyramidal neurons [12]. In the rat SN,
rAAV2 mediates transgene expression exclusively in SN
pars compacta [152] while rAAV1 and rAAV5 transduce
pars compacta and pars reticulata with similar efficiency
[12]. Interestingly, the bb2 serotype transduces only
medium spiny neurons in the rat striatum [150].
Other factors affecting rAAV cellular specificity include
the promoter, the age of the animals and the purity of the
viral preparation. For example, rAAV8 using constitutive
promoters almost exclusively mediates neuronal expression in the adult brain. However, contaminants present in
the stocks affected the virus’ tropism resulting in a low
propostion of astrocytes [34]. The mode of delivery can
also determine the cell-type specificity of rAAV-mediated
transgene expression. When injected in the brain parenchyma, rAAV9 directs transgene expression mainly in
neurons [14, 34]. In contrast, intravascular rAAV9 delivery
results in a variable percentage of astrocytes expressing
the transgene depending on the age of the animal, the
species and the structure of the rAAV genome. Indeed,
when injected in the facial vein of new born and adult
C57Bl/6 mice, respectively, mainly neurons or astrocytes
expressed the transgene [31]. In addition, Gray et al.
[38] reported that self-complementary AAV9 (a doublestranded form of AAV genome generated using a mutant
ITR; see below) injected in the tail vein of adult BALB/c mice
transduced twice as many neurons as astrocytes. This discrepancy might be explained by the injection site, the mice
species or the genomic structure. Gray et al. further demonstrated that traditional single-stranded rAAVs were
far less efficient than self-complementary vectors. Finally,
when the same vector was injected in the saphenous vein
of non-human primates they observed a mainly astrocytic transduction [38]. Neuronal transduction was also
reported by Duque et al. in the spinal cord of adult mice
after intravenous injection of self-complementary AAV9 in
the temporal vein [32].
Differential rAAV cell-type specificity between fetal and
adult brain was also reported. In rat fetal midbrain striatal
grafts, rAAV1 allowed massive transduction of DA neurons
whereas rAAV2 exclusively transduced non-DA neurons
(Figure 3) contrasting with rAAV2 tropism for adult midbrain DA neurons [152]. Similarly, rAAV1 but not rAAV5
encapsulating the same viral genome transduced fetal striatal neurons, whereas both very efficiently transduced
adult striatum [153]. Interestingly, enhanced glial gene
delivery in the brain has been obtained by selecting AAV
capsid variants through molecular evolution [154].
In order to restrict transgene expression in target cell
populations, different cell type-specific promoters were
tested. For example, using rAAV2, the neuron-specific

enolase promoter mediated restricted expression into
neurons [10] whereas with the cytomegalovirus (pCMV)
promoter, a small proportion of astrocytes also expressed
the reporter gene. Similar results were obtained with the
human synapsin I promoter (phSYN) [155]. As expected,
the tyrosine hydroxylase promoter allowed transgene
expression restricted to DA neurons [156]. An elegant
study using rAAV5-encapsidated bicistronic vectors
comprising one expression cassette using a promoter
sequence derived from the murine CMV (pmCMV) and
another under the control of phSYN showed that pmCMV
drives expression in cells located in the striosomes (possibly oligodendrocytes) whereas phSYN-driven expression
was strictly neuronal [157]. In an experiment using rAAV8
and rAAVrh43 in combination with the GFAP astrocytic
promoter, or the myelin basic protein (MBP) promoter
active in oligodendrocytes Lawlor et al. observed an
expression restricted to astrocytes with GFAP promoter
with both serotypes. With MBP promoter, in contrast, they
observed reporter gene expression mostly in oligodendrocytes with rAAV8 and in both astrocytes and oligodendrocytes with rAAVrh43. Surprisingly, when rAAVrh43 pMBP
was injected into the hippocampus, a weak expression of
the reporter gene was only observed in a subpopulation of
dentate gyrus neurons [150] indicating the necessity to
take into account cell-specific promoters and capsid variants for targeting.
Viral or composite promoters thought to be ubiquituous can also affect the cell-type specificity of rAAVmediated transgene expression. We showed that rAAV1
mediated differential specificities of transgene expression
depending on whether the expression is driven by a pCMV
promoter or a by Tet-ON cassette [26]. For example, in the
midbrain, transgene expression was restricted to the DA
regions (SNpc and VTA) with the Tet-On system but was
widespread in the midbrain with pCMV. Promoter-related
differential transduction has also been demonstrated in a
functional assay. In an epilepsy model, rAAV2 vectors
expressing a NMDA receptor-1 (NR1) antisense under the
control of pCMV and Tet-Off promoters caused an increase
in seizures while pCMV-driven NR1 antisense expression
lead to a significant reduction in seizures. Co-infusing
these two vectors, each expressing a different reporter
gene, demonstrated that they specify gene expression into
different neuronal populations [130].
Intravascularly-administered rAAV6, rAAV8 and rAAV9
[58] are able to deliver genes to the brain. However, using
this delivery mode, transgene expression is dramatically
more efficient in the liver, spleen and heart than in the
brain [158]. In order to restrict transgene expression to the
CNS, Gao successfully repressed rAAV9 expression outside
the CNS using a tissue-specific miRNA [159].
Another limiting step in rAAV-mediated gene delivery
is the conversion of the single-stranded viral DNA into a
transcriptionally-active double-strand DNA. The synthesis
of the second strand complementary to the viral DNA is
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

223

A. Chtarto et al.

mediated by cellular factors which are present in limiting
concentrations depending on the cell type [79, 160]).Based
on the discovery that (+) and (–) strand forms of AAV DNA
are generated during the viral vector production [161], it
has been proposed that when the genome copy number
in a single cell is high enough, annealing of a sense
sequence and an antisense sequence can occur. Based on
the presence of dimeric head to head replicative forms,
McCarty et al. [162] have introduced a mutation within one
of the ITRs which forces the encapsulation of dimers rather
than monomers The two head-to-head halves of vector
genomes called ‘self-complementary’ (scAAV) can anneal
and form a double-strand mediating faster and more efficient transgene expression in the brain [163]. It should be
noted that, due to limited packaging capacity, the maximal
genome size of scAAV is reduced by half compared with
conventional vectors. ScAAV2 and scAAV1injected in
the brain parenchyma mediate a faster onset of- and a
stronger transgene expression than AAV2 but do not seem
to alter the cellular tropism [39, 164]. Similarly, scAAV9
injected intravenously in the mice shows an efficacy similar
to a 20-fold higher dose of AAV9 [38].

Conclusions
Various strategies for therapeutic gene delivery to the CNS
have been explored. Aside from correction of recessive
genetic defects [29, 45, 165] or gene silencing through RNA
interference in autosomal dominant diseases [77, 166],
gene transfer paradigms for diseases not having a clearly
identified genetic origin have been explored. Interestingly,
three different gene therapy approaches for sporadic PD
have entered the clinics: converting L-dopa into dopamine
through AADC gene delivery in the putamen [53], synthesizing GABA through GAD gene delivery in the subthalamic nucleus [57] and providing neurotrophic support
through neurturin gene delivery in the nigro-striatal
pathway [67]. It is worth citing another clinical trial for
Parkinson’s disease using a lentiviral vector which, like
the AAV2-AADC gene therapy, encodes enzymes of the
dopamine biosynthetic pathway. However, taking advantage of the larger cloning capacity of lentiviral vectors as
compared with rAAV vectors, the three main enzymes
required to achieve dopamine biosynthesis from tyrosine,
i.e tyrosine hydroxylase, aromatic-L-acid decarboxylase
(AADC) and GTP-cyclohydrolase I could be encoded in a
single vector [167]. A clinical trial in which this vector is
injected in the patients’ putamen is ongoing (http://
www.abedia.com/wiley/record_detail.php?ID=310).
In some cases, localized and cell-type specific expression is required.For example, the success of the rAAV2-GAD
paradigm relies on the targeting of STN excitatory neurons
to turn them into inhibitory neurons. In addition, off-target
delivery might result in side effects. A clear demonstration
was provided by Haberman & McCown showing that trans224

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

ferring a NMDA receptor antisense in different types of
neurons may result in opposite behavioural effects [130].
Rationally-based targeting can be achieved by capsid
engineering [46, 154] or miRNA restricted-transgene
expression [159]. In the case of motoneuron diseases, targeting can also be achieved through retrograde delivery
[79, 168].
In other cases, in particular for enzymatic deficiencies,
global and efficient transgene expression is a prerequisite
to success. However, though global brain transduction is
searched, cell-type specificity might still be a limitation. In
leukodystrophies, for example, the missing enzyme must
be supplied to oligodendrocytes [29]. Since the majority of
gene therapy vectors, including rAAVs, transduce mostly
neurons after intraparenchymal delivery in most brain
regions [12, 13, 34, 155, 169], the derivation of vectors efficiently targeting oligodendrocytes is still a challenging
issue. Interestingly, in regions that do not harbor neurons,
such as the internal capsule or corpus callosum, glial cells
are readily transduced [27–29]. In addition, in a region of
active neurogenesis, the subventricular zone, immature
neuronal and glial progenitors at different developmental
stages were also transduced after local rAAV1 delivery
[164]. On the other hand, intravenous or intra-CSF delivery,
results in astrocytic in addition to neuronal transduction
[31, 32, 41]. A small degree of co-labelling between GFP
and Olig1 (an marker for oligodendrocytes) is also mentioned in the last study [41]. In contrast, in none of these
reports were microglia transduced.
Pioneer clinical trials have established the safety and
tolerability of rAAV2 delivery in the human brain at moderate doses. Therapeutic effects however, were modest,
emphasizing the need for more efficient vectors and/or
higher doses. More recently, clinical trials using AAVrh10
vectors for Batten disease (http://www.abedia.com/wiley/
record_detail.php?ID=1717) and MPSIIIA (http://www.
abedia.com/wiley/record_detail.php?ID=318) have been
launched.Vectors deriving from other serotypes mediating
efficient and widespread transgene expression are likely to
be tested in patients in the near future. In addition, aside
from the currently used stereotaxy-guided intraparenchymal delivery [170], new techniques for global brain transduction (by intravenous or intra-CSF injections) are very
promising [31, 32, 37, 39, 171].These new vectors and delivery routes will require re-addressing the pharmacological
aspects of rAAV-mediated gene transfer.
Adverse effects of uncontrolled or off-target delivery of
neurotrophic factors have been described [41, 71, 73, 172].
With the launching of clinical trials for neuroprotective
gene therapy with increasing vector doses [66], regulation
of transgene expression will likely be required to avoid
adverse events and, if necessary, terminate the treatment.
Among the regulatable systems, the Tet-system is the most
widely used and the best-developed [41]. However, important issues remain to be solved. First, immune reactions to
the VP16 portion of the Tet transactivator deriving from

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

rAAV2/1

approved dose for patients. The remaining challenges
will be to characterize and eventually circumvent the
immune reaction to the Tet transactivator as well as to
obtain inducer-transactivator interactors fulfilling clinical
requirements.

rAAV2/2

GFP/TH

Competing Interests

X10

X10

X40

X40

All authors have completed the Unified Competing Interest form at http://www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available on request from the corresponding author) and
declare no support from any organization for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organizations
that might have an interest in the submitted work in the
previous 3 years and no other relationships or activities
that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
The data for Figures 2 and 3 were generated by Catherine Pythoud and Enni Lehtonen respectively.
We thank Caleb McEntire for reading and proof reading
the manuscript.
This work was supported by FNS Grant n°
31003A_127177 to ML and LT and by a grant from Association Française des Myopahties to LT and AC. TT was supported by the Leonardo Mobility Fellowship (European
Commission Lifelong Learning Program).

REFERENCES
Figure 3
Differential cellular tropism of rAAV2/1 and rAAV2/2-mediated gene
transfer into fetal ventral mesencephalon grafted in adult rat striatum.
The ventral mesencephali (VM) from 14-day-old embryos were dissected
out and infected with rAAV vectors expressing eGFP reporter gene under
the control of CMV promoter, trans-encapsidated into AAV1 (rAAV1pCMV-eGFP) or AAV2 (rAAV2/2-pCMV-eGFP) capsids. Immediately after
infection, VMs were dissociated into individual cells and animals were
stereotactically infused into the right striatum with a cell suspension corresponding from the half of a VM per rat, as previously described [173].
Four weeks post-transplantation, animals were sacrificed and 40-mm
coronal brain sections were labelled using polyclonal rabbit anti-GFP
antibodies (green fluorescence) and monoclonal anti-tyrosine hydroxylase antibodies (red fluorescence). Double-labelled cells appear yellow.
Scale bar: 100 mm (10¥ pictures) and 50 mm (40¥ pictures)

HSV are likely to arise in HSV-seropositive patients. Second,
the inducer should be a clinically approved molecule effective at a clinically acceptable dose. The last developments
of rAAV-based Tet-Off vectors have shown regulation of an
adverse effect of GDNF (weight loss) using a Dox dose
which was below the approved anti-microbial dose [72].
However, therapeutic effects have not been addressed in
this study. On the other hand, using a rAAV-tetON vector,
Dox-dependent behavioural improvements have been
demonstrated in a well-established rodent model of PD
[80]. In this study, though, the Dox dose, by body mass was
more than one order of magnitude higher than the

1 Samulski RJ, Berns KI, Tan M, Muzyczka N. Cloning of
adeno-associated virus into pBR322: rescue of intact virus
from the recombinant plasmid in human cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1982; 79: 2077–81.
2 Laughlin CA, Tratschin JD, Coon H, Carter BJ. Cloning of
infectious adeno-associated virus genomes in bacterial
plasmids. Gene 1983; 23: 65–73.
3 Samulski RJ, Chang LS, Shenk T. Helper-free stocks of
recombinant adeno-associated viruses: normal integration
does not require viral gene expression. J Virol 1989; 63:
3822–8.
4 Zolotukhin S, Potter M, Hauswirth WW, Guy J, Muzyczka NA.
‘humanized’ green fluorescent protein cDNA adapted for
high-level expression in mammalian cells. J Virol 1996; 70:
4646–54.
5 Grimm D. Production methods for gene transfer vectors
based on adeno-associated virus serotypes. Methods 2002;
28: 146–57
6 Zolotukhin S, Potter M, Zolotukhin I, Sakai Y, Loiler S, Fraites
TJ Jr, Chiodo VA, Phillipsberg T, Muzyczka N, Hauswirth
WW, Flotte TR, Byrne BJ, Snyder RO. Production and
purification of serotype 1, 2, and 5 recombinant
adeno-associated viral vectors. Methods 2002; 28: 158–67.
7 Wu P, Phillips MI, Bui J, Terwilliger EF. Adeno-associated
virus vector-mediated transgene integration into neurons
and other nondividing cell targets. J Virol 1998; 72:
5919–26.
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

225

A. Chtarto et al.

8 Schnepp BC, Clark KR, Klemanski DL, Pacak CA, Johnson PR.
Genetic fate of recombinant adeno-associated virus vector
genomes in muscle. J Virol 2003; 77: 3495–504.

types 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, and 9 in the healthy population:
implications for gene therapy using AAV vectors. Hum
Gene Ther 2010; 21: 704–12.

9 Weinberg MS, Samulski RJ, McCown TJ. Adeno-associated
virus (AAV) gene therapy for neurological disease.
Neuropharmacology 2012; Mar 17 [Epub ahead of print].

22 Ciesielska A, Hadaczek P, Mittermeyer G, Zhou S, Wright JF,
Bankiewicz KS, Forsayeth J. Cerebral infusion of AAV9
vector-encoding non-self proteins can elicit cell-mediated
immune responses. Mol Ther 2013; 21: 158–66.

10 Klein RL, Hamby ME, Gong Y, Hirko AC, Wang S, Hughes JA,
King MA, Meyer EM. Dose and promoter effects of
adeno-associated viral vector for green fluorescent protein
expression in the rat brain. Exp Neurol 2002; 176: 66–74.

23 Schnepp BC, Jensen RL, Chen CL, Johnson PR, Clark KR.
Characterization of adeno-associated virus genomes
isolated from human tissues. J Virol 2005; 79: 14793–803.

11 Hadaczek P, Eberling JL, Pivirotto P, Bringas J, Forsayeth J,
Bankiewicz KS. Eight years of clinical improvement in
MPTP-lesioned primates after gene therapy with
AAV2-hAADC. Mol Ther 2010; 18: 1458–61.

24 Bell P, Wang L, Lebherz C, Flieder DB, Bove MS, Wu D, Gao
GP, Wilson JM, Wivel NA. No evidence for tumorigenesis of
AAV vectors in a large-scale study in mice. Mol Ther 2005;
12: 299–306.

12 Burger C, Gorbatyuk OS, Velardo MJ, Peden CS, Williams P,
Zolotukhin S, Reier PJ, Mandel RJ, Muzyczka N.
Recombinant AAV viral vectors pseudotyped with viral
capsids from serotypes 1, 2, and 5 display differential
efficiency and cell tropism after delivery to different
regions of the central nervous system. Mol Ther 2004; 10:
302–17.

25 Rosas LE, Grieves JL, Zaraspe K, La Perle KM, Fu H, McCarty
DM. Patterns of scAAV vector insertion associated with
oncogenic events in a mouse model for genotoxicity. Mol
Ther 2012; 20: 2098–110.

13 Taymans JM, Vandenberghe LH, Haute CV, Thiry I, Deroose
CM, Mortelmans L, Wilson JM, Debyser Z, Baekelandt V.
Comparative analysis of adeno-associated viral vector
serotypes 1, 2, 5, 7, and 8 in mouse brain. Hum Gene Ther
2007; 18: 195–206.
14 Cearley CN, Wolfe JH. Transduction characteristics of
adeno-associated virus vectors expressing cap serotypes 7,
8, 9, and Rh10 in the mouse brain. Mol Ther 2006; 13:
528–37.
15 Tenenbaum L, Lehtonen E, Monahan PE. Evaluation of risks
related to the use of adeno-associated virus-based vectors.
Curr Gene Ther 2003; 3: 545–65.
16 McCown TJ. Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors in the
CNS. Curr Gene Ther 2011; 11: 181–8.
17 Calcedo R, Vandenberghe LH, Gao G, Lin J, Wilson JM.
Worldwide epidemiology of neutralizing antibodies to
adeno-associated viruses. J Infect Dis 2009; 199: 381–90.
18 Calcedo R, Morizono H, Wang L, McCarter R, He J, Jones D,
Batshaw ML, Wilson JM. Adeno-associated virus antibody
profiles in newborns, children, and adolescents. Clin
Vaccine Immunol 2011; 18: 1586–8.
19 Peden CS, Burger C, Muzyczka N, Mandel RJ. Circulating
anti-wild-type adeno-associated virus type 2 (AAV2)
antibodies inhibit recombinant AAV2 (rAAV2)-mediated,
but not rAAV5-mediated, gene transfer in the brain. J Virol
2004; 78: 6344–59.
20 Treleaven CM, Tamsett TJ, Bu J, Fidler JA, Sardi SP, Hurlbut
GD, Woodworth LA, Cheng SH, Passini MA, Shihabuddin LS,
Dodge JC. Gene transfer to the CNS is efficacious in
immune-primed mice harboring physiologically relevant
titers of anti-AAV antibodies. Mol Ther 2012; 20: 1713–23.
21 Boutin S, Monteilhet V, Veron P, Leborgne C, Benveniste O,
Montus MF, Masurier C. Prevalence of serum IgG and
neutralizing factors against adeno-associated virus (AAV)
226

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

26 Bockstael O, Chtarto A, Wakkinen J, Yang X, Melas C,
Levivier M, Brotchi J, Tenenbaum L. Differential transgene
expression profiles in rat brain, using rAAV2/1 vectors with
tetracycline-inducible and cytomegalovirus promoters.
Hum Gene Ther 2008; 19: 1293–305.
27 Chen H, McCarty DM, Bruce AT, Suzuki K, Suzuki K. Gene
transfer and expression in oligodendrocytes under the
control of myelin basic protein transcriptional control
region mediated by adeno-associated virus. Gene Ther
1998; 5: 50–8.
28 Tenenbaum L, Jurysta F, Stathopoulos A, Puschban Z, Melas
C, Hermens WT, Verhaagen J, Pichon B, Velu T, Levivier M.
Tropism of AAV-2 vectors for neurons of the globus
pallidus. Neuroreport 2000; 11: 2277–83.
29 Piguet F, Sondhi D, Piraud M, Fouquet F, Hackett NR,
Ahouansou O, Vanier MT, Bieche I, Aubourg P, Crystal RG,
Cartier N, Sevin C. Correction of brain oligodendrocytes by
AAVrh.10 intracerebral gene therapy in metachromatic
leukodystrophy mice. Hum Gene Ther 2012; 23: 903–14.
30 Cearley CN, Vandenberghe LH, Parente MK, Carnish ER,
Wilson JM, Wolfe JH. Expanded repertoire of AAV vector
serotypes mediate unique patterns of transduction in
mouse brain. Mol Ther 2008; 16: 1710–8.
31 Foust KD, Nurre E, Montgomery CL, Hernandez A, Chan CM,
Kaspar BK. Intravascular AAV9 preferentially targets
neonatal neurons and adult astrocytes. Nat Biotechnol
2009; 27: 59–65.
32 Duque S, Joussemet B, Riviere C, Marais T, Dubreil L, Douar
AM, Fyfe J, Moullier P, Colle MA, Barkats M. Intravenous
administration of self-complementary AAV9 enables
transgene delivery to adult motor neurons. Mol Ther 2009;
17: 1187–96.
33 Samaranch L, Salegio EA, San Sebastian W, Kells AP, Foust
KD, Bringas JR, Lamarre C, Forsayeth J, Kaspar BK,
Bankiewicz KS. Adeno-associated virus serotype 9
transduction in the central nervous system of nonhuman
primates. Hum Gene Ther 2012; 23: 382–9.

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

34 Klein RL, Dayton RD, Tatom JB, Henderson KM, Henning PP.
AAV8, 9, Rh10, Rh43 vector gene transfer in the rat brain:
effects of serotype, promoter and purification method. Mol
Ther 2008; 16: 89–96.
35 Xue YQ, Ma BF, Zhao LR, Tatom JB, Li B, Jiang LX, Klein RL,
Duan WM. AAV9-mediated erythropoietin gene delivery
into the brain protects nigral dopaminergic neurons in a
rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Gene Ther 2010; 17:
83–94.
36 Mastakov MY, Baer K, Xu R, Fitzsimons H, During MJ.
Combined injection of rAAV with mannitol enhances gene
expression in the rat brain. Mol Ther 2001; 3: 225–32.
37 Fu H, Dirosario J, Killedar S, Zaraspe K, McCarty DM.
Correction of neurological disease of
mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB in adult mice by rAAV9
trans-blood-brain barrier gene delivery. Mol Ther 2011; 19:
1025–33.
38 Gray SJ, Matagne V, Bachaboina L, Yadav S, Ojeda SR,
Samulski RJ. Preclinical differences of intravascular AAV9
delivery to neurons and glia: a comparative study of adult
mice and nonhuman primates. Mol Ther 2011; 19: 1058–69.
39 Fu H, Muenzer J, Samulski RJ, Breese G, Sifford J, Zeng X,
McCarty DM. Self-complementary adeno-associated virus
serotype 2 vector: global distribution and broad dispersion
of AAV-mediated transgene expression in mouse brain. Mol
Ther 2003; 8: 911–7.
40 Gray SJ, Matagne V, Bachaboina L, Yadav S, Ojeda SR,
Samulski RJ. Preclinical differences of intravascular AAV9
delivery to neurons and glia: a comparative study of adult
mice and nonhuman primates. Mol Ther 2011; 19: 1058–69.
41 Manfredsson FP, Bloom DC, Mandel RJ. Regulated protein
expression for in vivo gene therapy for neurological
disorders: progress, strategies, and issues. Neurobiol Dis
2012; 48: 212–21.
42 Leone P, Janson CG, Bilaniuk L, Wang Z, Sorgi F, Huang L,
Matalon R, Kaul R, Zeng Z, Freese A, McPhee SW, Mee E,
During MJ. Aspartoacylase gene transfer to the mammalian
central nervous system with therapeutic implications for
Canavan disease. Ann Neurol 2000; 48: 27–38.
43 Janson C, McPhee S, Bilaniuk L, Haselgrove J, Testaiuti M,
Freese A, Wang DJ, Shera D, Hurh P, Rupin J, Saslow E,
Goldfarb O, Goldberg M, Larijani G, Sharrar W, Liouterman
L, Camp A, Kolodny E, Samulski J, Leone P. Clinical protocol.
gene therapy of Canavan disease: AAV-2 vector for
neurosurgical delivery of aspartoacylase gene (ASPA) to
the human brain. Hum Gene Ther 2002; 13: 1391–412.
44 McPhee SW, Janson CG, Li C, Samulski RJ, Camp AS, Francis
J, Shera D, Lioutermann L, Feely M, Freese A, Leone P.
Immune responses to AAV in a phase I study for Canavan
disease. J Gene Med 2006; 8: 577–88.
45 Leone P, Shera D, McPhee SW, Francis JS, Kolodny EH,
Bilaniuk LT, Wang DJ, Assadi M, Goldfarb O, Goldman HW,
Freese A, Young D, During MJ, Samulski RJ, Janson CG.
Long-term follow-up after gene therapy for canavan
disease. Sci Transl Med 2012; 4: 165ra163.
DOI:10.1126/scitranslmed.3003454.

46 Worgall S, Sondhi D, Hackett NR, Kosofsky B, Kekatpure MV,
Neyzi N, Dyke JP, Ballon D, Heier L, Greenwald BM, Christos
P, Mazumdar M, Souweidane MM, Kaplitt MG, Crystal RG.
Treatment of late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis by
CNS administration of a serotype 2 adeno-associated virus
expressing CLN2 cDNA. Hum Gene Ther 2008; 19: 463–74.
47 Sondhi D, Hackett NR, Peterson DA, Stratton J, Baad M,
Travis KM, Wilson JM, Crystal RG. Enhanced survival of the
LINCL mouse following CLN2 gene transfer using the rh.10
rhesus macaque-derived adeno-associated virus vector.
Mol Ther 2007; 15: 481–91.
48 Cressant A, Desmaris N, Verot L, Brejot T, Froissart R, Vanier
MT, Maire I, Heard JM. Improved behavior and
neuropathology in the mouse model of Sanfilippo type IIIB
disease after adeno-associated virus-mediated gene
transfer in the striatum. J Neurosci 2004; 24: 10229–39.
49 Carlsson A. A half-century of neurotransmitter research:
impact on neurology and psychiatry. Nobel lecture. Biosci
Rep 2001; 21: 691–710.
50 Mandel RJ, Rendahl KG, Snyder RO, Leff SE. Progress in
direct striatal delivery of L-dopa via gene therapy for
treatment of Parkinson’s disease using recombinant
adeno-associated viral vectors. Exp Neurol 1999; 159:
47–64.
51 Eberling JL, Jagust WJ, Christine CW, Starr P, Larson P,
Bankiewicz KS, Aminoff MJ. Results from a phase I safety
trial of hAADC gene therapy for Parkinson disease.
Neurology 2008; 70: 1980–3.
52 Sin M, Walker PD, Bouhamdan M, Quinn JP, Bannon MJ.
Preferential expression of an AAV-2 construct in
NOS-positive interneurons following intrastriatal injection.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005; 141: 74–82.
53 Mittermeyer G, Christine CW, Rosenbluth KH, Baker SL, Starr
P, Larson P, Kaplan PL, Forsayeth J, Aminoff MJ, Bankiewicz
KS. Long-term evaluation of a phase 1 study of AADC gene
therapy for Parkinson’s disease. Hum Gene Ther 2012; 23:
377–81.
54 Christine CW, Starr PA, Larson PS, Eberling JL, Jagust WJ,
Hawkins RA, VanBrocklin HF, Wright JF, Bankiewicz KS,
Aminoff MJ. Safety and tolerability of putaminal AADC
gene therapy for Parkinson disease. Neurology 2009; 73:
1662–9.
55 Limousin P, Pollak P, Benazzouz A, Hoffmann D, Le Bas JF,
Broussolle E, Perret JE, Benabid AL. Effect of parkinsonian
signs and symptoms of bilateral subthalamic nucleus
stimulation. Lancet 1995; 345: 91–5.
56 Luo J, Kaplitt MG, Fitzsimons HL, Zuzga DS, Liu Y, Oshinsky
ML, During MJ. Subthalamic GAD gene therapy in a
Parkinson’s disease rat model. Science 2002; 298: 425–9.
57 Kaplitt MG, Feigin A, Tang C, Fitzsimons HL, Mattis P, Lawlor
PA, Bland RJ, Young D, Strybing K, Eidelberg D, During MJ.
Safety and tolerability of gene therapy with an
adeno-associated virus (AAV) borne GAD gene for
Parkinson’s disease: an open label, phase I trial. Lancet
2007; 369: 2097–105.
58 LeWitt PA, Rezai AR, Leehey MA, Ojemann SG, Flaherty AW,
Eskandar EN, Kostyk SK, Thomas K, Sarkar A, Siddiqui MS,
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

227

A. Chtarto et al.

Tatter SB, Schwalb JM, Poston KL, Henderson JM, Kurlan RM,
Richard IH, Van Meter L, Sapan CV, During MJ, Kaplitt MG,
Feigin A. AAV2-GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson’s
disease: a double-blind, sham-surgery controlled,
randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 2011; 10: 309–19.

Bartus RT. Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal delivery
of CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus serotype 2-neurturin)
to patients with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: an
open-label, phase I trial. Lancet Neurol 2008; 7: 400–8.

59 Lo Bianco C, Deglon N, Pralong W, Aebischer P. Lentiviral
nigral delivery of GDNF does not prevent
neurodegeneration in a genetic rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. Neurobiol Dis 2004; 17: 283–9.

69 Bartus RT, Herzog CD, Chu Y, Wilson A, Brown L, Siffert J,
Johnson EM Jr, Olanow CW, Mufson EJ, Kordower JH.
Bioactivity of AAV2-neurturin gene therapy (CERE-120):
differences between Parkinson’s disease and nonhuman
primate brains. Mov Disord 2011; 26: 27–36.

60 Mandel RJ, Snyder RO, Leff SE. Recombinant
adeno-associated viral vector-mediated glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor gene transfer protects
nigral dopamine neurons after onset of progressive
degeneration in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Exp
Neurol 1999; 160: 205–14.

70 Georgievska B, Kirik D, Bjorklund A. Aberrant sprouting and
downregulation of tyrosine hydroxylase in lesioned
nigrostriatal dopamine neurons induced by long-lasting
overexpression of glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor
in the striatum by lentiviral gene transfer. Exp Neurol 2002;
177: 461–74.

61 Kirik D, Rosenblad C, Bjorklund A, Mandel RJ. Long-term
rAAV-mediated gene transfer of GDNF in the rat
Parkinson’s model: intrastriatal but not intranigral
transduction promotes functional regeneration in the
lesioned nigrostriatal system. J Neurosci 2000; 20:
4686–700.

71 Hovland DN Jr, Boyd RB, Butt MT, Engelhardt JA, Moxness
MS, Ma MH, Emery MG, Ernst NB, Reed RP, Zeller JR, Gash
DM, Masterman DM, Potter BM, Cosenza ME, Lightfoot RM.
Six-month continuous intraputamenal infusion toxicity
study of recombinant methionyl human glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor (r-metHuGDNF) in rhesus
monkeys. Toxicol Pathol 2007; 35: 676–92.

62 Choi-Lundberg DL, Lin Q, Chang YN, Chiang YL, Hay CM,
Mohajeri H, Davidson BL, Bohn MC. Dopaminergic neurons
protected from degeneration by GDNF gene therapy.
Science 1997; 275: 838–41.
63 Kordower JH, Emborg ME, Bloch J, Ma SY, Chu Y, Leventhal
L, McBride J, Chen EY, Palfi S, Roitberg BZ, Brown WD,
Holden JE, Pyzalski R, Taylor MD, Carvey P, Ling Z, Trono D,
Hantraye P, Deglon N, Aebischer P. Neurodegeneration
prevented by lentiviral vector delivery of GDNF in primate
models of Parkinson’s disease. Science 2000; 290: 767–73.
64 Eslamboli A, Cummings RM, Ridley RM, Baker HF, Muzyczka
N, Burger C, Mandel RJ, Kirik D, Annett LE. Recombinant
adeno-associated viral vector (rAAV) delivery of GDNF
provides protection against 6-OHDA lesion in the common
marmoset monkey (Callithrix jacchus). Exp Neurol 2003;
184: 536–48.
65 Tomac A, Widenfalk J, Lin LF, Kohno T, Ebendal T, Hoffer BJ,
Olson L. Retrograde axonal transport of glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor in the adult nigrostriatal
system suggests a trophic role in the adult. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 1995; 92: 8274–8.
66 Bartus RT, Baumann TL, Brown L, Kruegel BR, Ostrove JM,
Herzog CD. Advancing neurotrophic factors as treatments
for age-related neurodegenerative diseases: developing
and demonstrating ‘clinical proof-of-concept’ for
AAV-neurturin (CERE-120) in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol
Aging 2013; 34: 35–61.
67 Marks WJ Jr, Bartus RT, Siffert J, Davis CS, Lozano A, Boulis
N, Vitek J, Stacy M, Turner D, Verhagen L, Bakay R, Watts R,
Guthrie B, Jankovic J, Simpson R, Tagliati M, Alterman R,
Stern M, Baltuch G, Starr PA, Larson PS, Ostrem JL, Nutt J,
Kieburtz K, Kordower JH, Olanow CW. Gene delivery of
AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind,
randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2010; 9:
1164–72.
68 Marks WJ Jr, Ostrem JL, Verhagen L, Starr PA, Larson PS,
Bakay RA, Taylor R, Cahn-Weiner DA, Stoessl AJ, Olanow CW,
228

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

72 Manfredsson FP, Burger C, Rising AC, Zuobi-Hasona K,
Sullivan LF, Lewin AS, Huang J, Piercefield E, Muzyczka N,
Mandel RJ. Tight long-term dynamic doxycycline
responsive nigrostriatal GDNF using a single rAAV vector.
Mol Ther 2009; 17: 1857–67.
73 Lang AE, Gill S, Patel NK, Lozano A, Nutt JG, Penn R, Brooks
DJ, Hotton G, Moro E, Heywood P, Brodsky MA, Burchiel K,
Kelly P, Dalvi A, Scott B, Stacy M, Turner D, Wooten VG, Elias
WJ, Laws ER, Dhawan V, Stoessl AJ, Matcham J, Coffey RJ,
Traub M. Randomized controlled trial of intraputamenal
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor infusion in
Parkinson disease. Ann Neurol 2006; 59: 459–66.
74 Burcin MM, O’Malley BW, Tsai SY. A regulatory system for
target gene expression. Front Biosci 1998; 3: c1–7.
75 Stieger K, Belbellaa B, Le Guiner C, Moullier P, Rolling F. In
vivo gene regulation using tetracycline-regulatable
systems. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2009; 61: 527–41.
76 Toniatti C, Bujard H, Cortese R, Ciliberto G. Gene therapy
progress and prospects: transcription regulatory systems.
Gene Ther 2004; 11: 649–57.
77 Davidson BL, McCray PB Jr. Current prospects for RNA
interference-based therapies. Nat Rev Genet 2011; 12:
329–40.
78 Hadaczek P, Beyer J, Kells A, Narrow W, Bowers W, Federoff
HJ, Forsayeth J, Bankiewicz KS. Evaluation of an AAV2-based
rapamycin-regulated glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) expression vector system. PLoS ONE 2011; 6:
e27728.
79 Kaspar BK, Llado J, Sherkat N, Rothstein JD, Gage FH.
Retrograde viral delivery of IGF-1 prolongs survival in a
mouse ALS model. Science 2003; 301: 839–42.
80 Yang X, Mertens B, Lehtonen E, Vercammen L, Bockstael O,
Chtarto A, Levivier M, Brotchi J, Michotte Y, Baekelandt V,
Sarre S, Tenenbaum L. Reversible neurochemical changes

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

mediated by delayed intrastriatal glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor gene delivery in a partial Parkinson’s
disease rat model. J Gene Med 2009; 11: 899–912.

95 Zhou X, Vink M, Klaver B, Berkhout B, Das AT. Optimization
of the Tet-On system for regulated gene expression
through viral evolution. Gene Ther 2006; 13: 1382–90.

81 Gossen M, Bujard H. Tight control of gene expression in
mammalian cells by tetracycline-responsive promoters.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992; 89: 5547–51.

96 Agha-Mohammadi S, O’Malley M, Etemad A, Wang Z, Xiao
X, Lotze MT. Second-generation tetracycline-regulatable
promoter: repositioned Tet operator elements optimize
transactivator synergy while shorter minimal promoter
offers tight basal leakiness. J Gene Med 2004; 6: 817–28.

82 Kistner A, Gossen M, Zimmermann F, Jerecic J, Ullmer C,
Lubbert H, Bujard H. Doxycycline-mediated quantitative
and tissue-specific control of gene expression in transgenic
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996; 93: 10933–8.
83 Corti O, Sanchez-Capelo A, Colin P, Hanoun N, Hamon M,
Mallet J. Long-term doxycycline-controlled expression of
human tyrosine hydroxylase after direct
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to a rat model of
Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999; 96:
12120–5.
84 Corti O, Sabate O, Horellou P, Colin P, Dumas S, Buchet D,
Buc-Caron MH, Mallet J. A single adenovirus vector
mediates doxycycline-controlled expression of tyrosine
hydroxylase in brain grafts of human neural progenitors.
Nat Biotechnol 1999; 17: 349–54.
85 Harding TC, Geddes BJ, Murphy D, Knight D, Uney JB.
Switching transgene expression in the brain using an
adenoviral tetracycline-regulatable system. Nat Biotechnol
1998; 16: 553–5.
86 Maibach H. Second-generation tetracyclines, a
dermatologic overview: clinical uses and pharmacology.
Cutis 1991; 48: 411–7.

97 Baron U, Freundlieb S, Gossen M, Bujard H. Co-regulation of
two gene activities by tetracycline via a bidirectional
promoter. Nucleic Acids Res 1995; 23: 3605–6.
98 Danke C, Grunz X, Wittmann J, Schmidt A,
Agha-Mohammadi S, Kutsch O, Jack HM, Hillen W, Berens C.
Adjusting transgene expression levels in lymphocytes with
a set of inducible promoters. J Gene Med 2010; 12: 501–15.
99 Loew R, Heinz N, Hampf M, Bujard H, Gossen M. Improved
Tet-responsive promoters with minimized background
expression. BMC Biotechnol 2010; 10: 81.
DOI:10.1186/1472-6750-10-81.
100 Haberman RP, McCown TJ, Samulski RJ. Novel
transcriptional regulatory signals in the adeno-associated
virus terminal repeat A/D junction element. J Virol 2000; 74:
8732–9.
101 Chen Q, Xiong X, Lee TH, Liu Y, Sun QA, Wetsel W, Zhang X.
Adeno-associated virus-mediated ILK gene silencing in the
rat NAc core. J Neurosci Methods 2008; 173: 208–14.

87 Baron U, Gossen M, Bujard H. Tetracycline-controlled
transcription in eukaryotes: novel transactivators with
graded transactivation potential. Nucleic Acids Res 1997;
25: 2723–9.

102 Chtarto A, Bender HU, Hanemann CO, Kemp T, Lehtonen E,
Levivier M, Brotchi J, Velu T, Tenenbaum L.
Tetracycline-inducible transgene expression mediated by a
single AAV vector. Gene Ther 2003; 10: 84–94.

88 Gossen M, Freundlieb S, Bender G, Muller G, Hillen W,
Bujard H. Transcriptional activation by tetracyclines in
mammalian cells. Science 1995; 268: 1766–9.

103 Fitzsimons HL, McKenzie JM, During MJ. Insulators coupled
to a minimal bidirectional tet cassette for tight regulation
of rAAV-mediated gene transfer in the mammalian brain.
Gene Ther 2001; 8: 1675–81.

89 Park HJ, RajBhandary UL. Tetracycline-regulated
suppression of amber codons in mammalian cells. Mol Cell
Biol 1998; 18: 4418–25.
90 Yoshida Y, Hamada H. Adenovirus-mediated inducible gene
expression through tetracycline-controllable transactivator
with nuclear localization signal. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1997; 230: 426–30.
91 Urlinger S, Baron U, Thellmann M, Hasan MT, Bujard H,
Hillen W. Exploring the sequence space for
tetracycline-dependent transcriptional activators: novel
mutations yield expanded range and sensitivity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2000; 97: 7963–8.
92 Valencik ML, McDonald JA. Codon optimization markedly
improves doxycycline regulated gene expression in the
mouse heart. Transgenic Res 2001; 10: 269–75.
93 Wells KD, Foster JA, Moore K, Pursel VG, Wall RJ. Codon
optimization, genetic insulation, and an rtTA reporter
improve performance of the tetracycline switch. Transgenic
Res 1999; 8: 371–81.
94 Das AT, Zhou X, Vink M, Klaver B, Verhoef K, Marzio G,
Berkhout B. Viral evolution as a tool to improve the
tetracycline-regulated gene expression system. J Biol Chem
2004; 279: 18776–82.

104 Haberman RP, McCown TJ, Samulski RJ. Inducible long-term
gene expression in brain with adeno-associated virus gene
transfer. Gene Ther 1998; 5: 1604–11.
105 Jiang L, Rampalli S, George D, Press C, Bremer EG,
O’Gorman MR, Bohn MC. Tight regulation from a single
Tet-off rAAV vector as demonstrated by flow cytometry
and quantitative, real-time PCR. Gene Ther 2004; 11:
1057–67.
106 Ariza J, Bosilkovski M, Cascio A, Colmenero JD, Corbel MJ,
Falagas ME, Memish ZA, Roushan MR, Rubinstein E, Sipsas
NV, Solera J, Young EJ, Pappas G. Perspectives for the
treatment of brucellosis in the 21st century: the Ioannina
recommendations. PLoS Med 2007; 4: e317.
107 Berman B, Perez OA, Zell D. Update on rosacea and
anti-inflammatory-dose doxycycline. Drugs Today (Barc)
2007; 43: 27–34.
108 Chtarto A, Yang X, Bockstael O, Melas C, Blum D, Lehtonen
E, Abeloos L, Jaspar JM, Levivier M, Brotchi J, Velu T,
Tenenbaum L. Controlled delivery of glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor by a single tetracycline-inducible AAV
vector. Exp Neurol 2007; 204: 387–99.
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

229

A. Chtarto et al.

109 Chopra I, Roberts M. Tetracycline antibiotics: mode of
action, applications, molecular biology, and epidemiology
of bacterial resistance. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2001; 65:
232–60. second page, table of contents.
110 Sapadin AN, Fleischmajer R. Tetracyclines: nonantibiotic
properties and their clinical implications. J Am Acad
Dermatol 2006; 54: 258–65.
111 Rodriguez Hernandez H, Sanchez Anguiano LF, Quinones E.
[Eradication of Helicobacter pylori in peptic ulcer and
chronic gastritis. A randomized clinical trial]. Rev
Gastroenterol Mex 1998; 63: 21–7.
112 Krueger C, Pfleiderer K, Hillen W, Berens C. Tetracycline
derivatives: alternative effectors for Tet transregulators.
Biotechniques 2004; 37: 546, 548, 550.
113 Agwuh KN, MacGowan A. Pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of the tetracyclines including
glycylcyclines. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 58: 256–65.
114 Chtarto A, Tenenbaum L, Velu T, Brotchi J, Levivier M, Blum
D. Minocycline-induced activation of
tetracycline-responsive promoter. Neurosci Lett 2003; 352:
155–8.
115 Bantubungi K, Jacquard C, Greco A, Pintor A, Chtarto A, Tai
K, Galas MC, Tenenbaum L, Deglon N, Popoli P, Minghetti L,
Brouillet E, Brotchi J, Levivier M, Schiffmann SN, Blum D.
Minocycline in phenotypic models of Huntington’s disease.
Neurobiol Dis 2005; 18: 206–17.
116 Blum D, Chtarto A, Tenenbaum L, Brotchi J, Levivier M.
Clinical potential of minocycline for neurodegenerative
disorders. Neurobiol Dis 2004; 17: 359–66.
117 Eger K, Hermes M, Uhlemann K, Rodewald S, Ortwein J,
Brulport M, Bauer AW, Schormann W, Lupatsch F, Schiffer
IB, Heimerdinger CK, Gebhard S, Spangenberg C, Prawitt D,
Trost T, Zabel B, Sauer C, Tanner B, Kolbl H, Krugel U, Franke
H, Illes P, Madaj-Sterba P, Bockamp EO, Beckers T, Hengstler
JG. 4-Epidoxycycline: an alternative to doxycycline to
control gene expression in conditional mouse models.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004; 323: 979–86.
118 Zhu P, Aller MI, Baron U, Cambridge S, Bausen M, Herb J,
Sawinski J, Cetin A, Osten P, Nelson ML, Kugler S, Seeburg
PH, Sprengel R, Hasan MT. Silencing and un-silencing of
tetracycline-controlled genes in neurons. PLoS ONE 2007; 2:
e533.
119 Chrast-Balz J, Hooft van Huijsduijnen R. Bi-directional gene
switching with the tetracycline repressor and a novel
tetracycline antagonist. Nucleic Acids Res 1996; 24: 2900–4.
120 Love J, Allen GC, Gatz C, Thompson WF. Differential Top10
promoter regulation by six tetracycline analogues in plant
cells. J Exp Bot 2002; 53: 1871–7.
121 Latta-Mahieu M, Rolland M, Caillet C, Wang M, Kennel P,
Mahfouz I, Loquet I, Dedieu JF, Mahfoudi A, Trannoy E,
Thuillier V. Gene transfer of a chimeric trans-activator is
immunogenic and results in short-lived transgene
expression. Hum Gene Ther 2002; 13: 1611–20.
122 Chenuaud P, Larcher T, Rabinowitz JE, Provost N, Joussemet
B, Bujard H, Samulski RJ, Favre D, Moullier P. Optimal design
230

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

of a single recombinant adeno-associated virus derived
from serotypes 1 and 2 to achieve more tightly regulated
transgene expression from nonhuman primate muscle. Mol
Ther 2004; 9: 410–8.
123 Favre D, Blouin V, Provost N, Spisek R, Porrot F, Bohl D,
Marme F, Cherel Y, Salvetti A, Hurtrel B, Heard JM, Riviere Y,
Moullier P. Lack of an immune response against the
tetracycline-dependent transactivator correlates with
long-term doxycycline-regulated transgene expression in
nonhuman primates after intramuscular injection of
recombinant adeno-associated virus. J Virol 2002; 76:
11605–11.
124 Xiong W, Candolfi M, Kroeger KM, Puntel M, Mondkar S,
Larocque D, Liu C, Curtin JF, Palmer D, Ng P, Lowenstein PR,
Castro MG. Immunization against the transgene but not
the TetON switch reduces expression from gutless
adenoviral vectors in the brain. Mol Ther 2008; 16: 343–51.
125 Lowenstein PR, Mandel RJ, Xiong WD, Kroeger K, Castro MG.
Immune responses to adenovirus and adeno-associated
vectors used for gene therapy of brain diseases: the role of
immunological synapses in understanding the cell biology
of neuroimmune interactions. Curr Gene Ther 2007; 7:
347–60.
126 Streilein JW. Ocular immune privilege: therapeutic
opportunities from an experiment of nature. Nat Rev
Immunol 2003; 3: 879–89.
127 Han Y, Chang QA, Virag T, West NC, George D, Castro MG,
Bohn MC. Lack of humoral immune response to the
tetracycline (Tet) activator in rats injected intracranially
with Tet-off rAAV vectors. Gene Ther 2010; 17: 616–25.
128 Xu F, Sternberg MR, Kottiri BJ, McQuillan GM, Lee FK,
Nahmias AJ, Berman SM, Markowitz LE. Trends in herpes
simplex virus type 1 and type 2 seroprevalence in the
United States. JAMA 2006; 296: 964–73.
129 Burcin MM, Schiedner G, Kochanek S, Tsai SY, O’Malley BW.
Adenovirus-mediated regulable target gene expression in
vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999; 96: 355–60.
130 Haberman R, Criswell H, Snowdy S, Ming Z, Breese G,
Samulski R, McCown T. Therapeutic liabilities of in vivo viral
vector tropism: adeno-associated virus vectors, NMDAR1
antisense, and focal seizure sensitivity. Mol Ther 2002; 6:
495–500.
131 Sanftner LM, Rivera VM, Suzuki BM, Feng L, Berk L, Zhou S,
Forsayeth JR, Clackson T, Cunningham J. Dimerizer
regulation of AADC expression and behavioral response in
AAV-transduced 6-OHDA lesioned rats. Mol Ther 2006; 13:
167–74.
132 Iwamoto M, Bjorklund T, Lundberg C, Kirik D, Wandless TJ. A
general chemical method to regulate protein stability in
the mammalian central nervous system. Chem Biol 2010;
17: 981–8.
133 Shi W, Arnold GS, Bartlett JS. Insertional mutagenesis of the
adeno-associated virus type 2 (AAV2) capsid gene and
generation of AAV2 vectors targeted to alternative
cell-surface receptors. Hum Gene Ther 2001; 12: 1697–711.
134 Bowles DE, McPhee SW, Li C, Gray SJ, Samulski JJ, Camp AS,
Li J, Wang B, Monahan PE, Rabinowitz JE, Grieger JC,

Pharmacology of AAV-mediated gene therapy in the CNS

Govindasamy L, Agbandje-McKenna M, Xiao X, Samulski RJ.
Phase 1 gene therapy for Duchenne muscular dystrophy
using a translational optimized AAV vector. Mol Ther 2012;
20: 443–55.
135 Grimm D, Lee JS, Wang L, Desai T, Akache B, Storm TA, Kay
MA. In vitro and in vivo gene therapy vector evolution via
multispecies interbreeding and retargeting of
adeno-associated viruses. J Virol 2008; 82: 5887–911.
136 Gray SJ, Blake BL, Criswell HE, Nicolson SC, Samulski RJ,
McCown TJ, Li W. Directed evolution of a novel
adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector that crosses the
seizure-compromised blood-brain barrier (BBB). Mol Ther
2010; 18: 570–8.
137 Johnson JS, Li C, DiPrimio N, Weinberg MS, McCown TJ,
Samulski RJ. Mutagenesis of adeno-associated virus type 2
capsid protein VP1 uncovers new roles for basic amino
acids in trafficking and cell-specific transduction. J Virol
2010; 84: 8888–902.
138 Girod A, Ried M, Wobus C, Lahm H, Leike K, Kleinschmidt J,
Deleage G, Hallek M. Genetic capsid modifications allow
efficient re-targeting of adeno-associated virus type 2. Nat
Med 1999; 5: 1052–6.
139 Perabo L, Endell J, King S, Lux K, Goldnau D, Hallek M,
Buning H. Combinatorial engineering of a gene therapy
vector: directed evolution of adeno-associated virus. J Gene
Med 2006; 8: 155–62.
140 Boucas J, Lux K, Huber A, Schievenbusch S, von Freyend MJ,
Perabo L, Quadt-Humme S, Odenthal M, Hallek M, Buning
H. Engineering adeno-associated virus serotype 2-based
targeting vectors using a new insertion site-position
453-and single point mutations. J Gene Med 2009; 11:
1103–13.
141 Klimczak RR, Koerber JT, Dalkara D, Flannery JG, Schaffer
DV. A novel adeno-associated viral variant for efficient and
selective intravitreal transduction of rat Muller cells. PLoS
ONE 2009; 4: e7467.
142 Petrs-Silva H, Dinculescu A, Li Q, Deng WT, Pang JJ, Min SH,
Chiodo V, Neeley AW, Govindasamy L, Bennett A,
Agbandje-McKenna M, Zhong L, Li B, Jayandharan GR,
Srivastava A, Lewin AS, Hauswirth WW. Novel properties of
tyrosine-mutant AAV2 vectors in the mouse retina. Mol
Ther 2011; 19: 293–301.
143 Gao G, Alvira MR, Somanathan S, Lu Y, Vandenberghe LH,
Rux JJ, Calcedo R, Sanmiguel J, Abbas Z, Wilson JM.
Adeno-associated viruses undergo substantial evolution in
primates during natural infections. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2003; 100: 6081–6.
144 Rabinowitz JE, Rolling F, Li C, Conrath H, Xiao W, Xiao X,
Samulski RJ. Cross-packaging of a single adeno-associated
virus (AAV) type 2 vector genome into multiple AAV
serotypes enables transduction with broad specificity.
J Virol 2002; 76: 791–801.
145 Davidson BL, Stein CS, Heth JA, Martins I, Kotin RM, Derksen
TA, Zabner J, Ghodsi A, Chiorini JA. Recombinant
adeno-associated virus type 2, 4, and 5 vectors:
transduction of variant cell types and regions in the
mammalian central nervous system. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2000; 97: 3428–32.

146 McFarland NR, Lee JS, Hyman BT, McLean PJ. Comparison of
transduction efficiency of recombinant AAV serotypes 1, 2,
5, and 8 in the rat nigrostriatal system. J Neurochem 2009;
109: 838–45.
147 Vite CH, Passini MA, Haskins ME, Wolfe JH.
Adeno-associated virus vector-mediated transduction in
the cat brain. Gene Ther 2003; 10: 1874–81.
148 Markakis EA, Vives KP, Bober J, Leichtle S, Leranth C,
Beecham J, Elsworth JD, Roth RH, Samulski RJ, Redmond DE
Jr. Comparative transduction efficiency of AAV vector
serotypes 1–6 in the substantia nigra and striatum of the
primate brain. Mol Ther 2010; 18: 588–93.
149 Dodiya HB, Bjorklund T, Stansell J 3rd, Mandel RJ, Kirik D,
Kordower JH. Differential transduction following basal
ganglia administration of distinct pseudotyped AAV capsid
serotypes in nonhuman primates. Mol Ther 2010; 18:
579–87.
150 Lawlor PA, Bland RJ, Mouravlev A, Young D, During MJ.
Efficient gene delivery and selective transduction of glial
cells in the mammalian brain by AAV serotypes isolated
from nonhuman primates. Mol Ther 2009; 17: 1692–702.
151 Hadaczek P, Forsayeth J, Mirek H, Munson K, Bringas J,
Pivirotto P, McBride JL, Davidson BL, Bankiewicz KS.
Transduction of nonhuman primate brain with
adeno-associated virus serotype 1: vector trafficking and
immune response. Hum Gene Ther 2009; 20: 225–37.
152 Klein RL, Meyer EM, Peel AL, Zolotukhin S, Meyers C,
Muzyczka N, King MA. Neuron-specific transduction in the
rat septohippocampal or nigrostriatal pathway by
recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors. Exp Neurol
1998; 150: 183–94.
153 Lubansu A, Abeloos L, Bockstael O, Lehtonen E, Blum D,
Brotchi J, Levivier M, Tenenbaum L. Recombinant AAV viral
vectors serotype 1, 2, and 5 mediate differential gene
transfer efficiency in rat striatal fetal grafts. Cell Transplant
2008; 16: 1013–20.
154 Koerber JT, Klimczak R, Jang JH, Dalkara D, Flannery JG,
Schaffer DV. Molecular evolution of adeno-associated virus
for enhanced glial gene delivery. Mol Ther 2009; 17:
2088–95.
155 Kugler S, Lingor P, Scholl U, Zolotukhin S, Bahr M.
Differential transgene expression in brain cells in vivo and
in vitro from AAV-2 vectors with small transcriptional
control units. Virology 2003; 311: 89–95.
156 Oh MS, Hong SJ, Huh Y, Kim KS. Expression of transgenes in
midbrain dopamine neurons using the tyrosine
hydroxylase promoter. Gene Ther 2009; 16: 437–40.
157 Shevtsova Z, Malik JM, Michel U, Bahr M, Kugler S.
Promoters and serotypes: targeting of adeno-associated
virus vectors for gene transfer in the rat central nervous
system in vitro and in vivo. Exp Physiol 2005; 90: 53–9.
158 Zhang H, Yang B, Mu X, Ahmed SS, Su Q, He R, Wang H,
Mueller C, Sena-Esteves M, Brown R, Xu Z, Gao G. Several
rAAV vectors efficiently cross the blood-brain barrier and
transduce neurons and astrocytes in the neonatal mouse
central nervous system. Mol Ther 2011; 19: 1440–8.
Br J Clin Pharmacol

/ 76:2

/

231

A. Chtarto et al.

159 Xie J, Xie Q, Zhang H, Ameres SL, Hung JH, Su Q, He R, Mu X,
Seher Ahmed S, Park S, Kato H, Li C, Mueller C, Mello CC,
Weng Z, Flotte TR, Zamore PD, Gao G. MicroRNA-regulated,
systemically delivered rAAV9: a step closer to
CNS-restricted transgene expression. Mol Ther 2011; 19:
526–35.

166 Jarraya B, Boulet S, Ralph GS, Jan C, Bonvento G, Azzouz M,
Miskin JE, Shin M, Delzescaux T, Drouot X, Herard AS, Day
DM, Brouillet E, Kingsman SM, Hantraye P, Mitrophanous
KA, Mazarakis ND, Palfi S. Dopamine gene therapy for
Parkinson’s disease in a nonhuman primate without
associated dyskinesia. Sci Transl Med 2009; 1: 2ra4.

160 Qing K, Wang XS, Kube DM, Ponnazhagan S, Bajpai A,
Srivastava A. Role of tyrosine phosphorylation of a cellular
protein in adeno-associated virus 2-mediated transgene
expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997; 94: 10879–84.

167 Chen H, McCarty DM, Bruce AT, Suzuki K.
Oligodendrocyte-specific gene expression in mouse brain:
use of a myelin-forming cell type-specific promoter in an
adeno-associated virus. J Neurosci Res 1999; 55: 504–13.

161 Nakai H, Storm TA, Kay MA. Recruitment of single-stranded
recombinant adeno-associated virus vector genomes and
intermolecular recombination are responsible for stable
transduction of liver in vivo. J Virol 2000; 74: 9451–63.
162 McCarty DM, Fu H, Monahan PE, Toulson CE, Naik P,
Samulski RJ. Adeno-associated virus terminal repeat (TR)
mutant generates self-complementary vectors to
overcome the rate-limiting step to transduction in vivo.
Gene Ther 2003; 10: 2112–8.
163 McCarty DM, Monahan PE, Samulski RJ.
Self-complementary recombinant adeno-associated virus
(scAAV) vectors promote efficient transduction
independently of DNA synthesis. Gene Ther 2001; 8:
1248–54.
164 Bockstael O, Melas C, Pythoud C, Levivier M, McCarty D,
Samulski RJ, De Witte O, Tenenbaum L. Rapid transgene
expression in multiple precursor cell types of adult rat
subventricular zone mediated by adeno-associated type 1
vectors. Hum Gene Ther 2012; 23: 742–53.
165 Ciron C, Cressant A, Roux F, Raoul S, Cherel Y, Hantraye P,
Deglon N, Schwartz B, Barkats M, Heard JM, Tardieu M,
Moullier P, Colle MA. Human alpha-iduronidase gene
transfer mediated by adeno-associated virus types 1, 2, and
5 in the brain of nonhuman primates: vector diffusion and
biodistribution. Hum Gene Ther 2009; 20: 350–60.

232

/ 76:2

/

Br J Clin Pharmacol

168 Xie J, Xie Q, Zhang H, Ameres SL, Hung JH, Su Q, He R, Mu X,
Seher Ahmed S, Park S, Kato H, Li C, Mueller C, Mello CC,
Weng Z, Flotte TR, Zamore PD, Gao G. MicroRNA-regulated,
systemically delivered rAAV9: a step closer to
CNS-restricted transgene expression. Mol Ther 2011; 19:
526–35.
169 Bartlett JS, Samulski RJ, McCown TJ. Selective and rapid
uptake of adeno-associated virus type 2 in brain. Hum
Gene Ther 1998; 9: 1181–6.
170 Salegio EA, Samaranch L, Kells AP, Forsayeth J, Bankiewicz
K. Guided delivery of adeno-associated viral vectors into
the primate brain. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2012; 64: 598–604.
171 Dayton RD, Wang DB, Klein RL. The advent of AAV9
expands applications for brain and spinal cord gene
delivery. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2012; 12: 757–66.
172 Manfredsson FP, Tumer N, Erdos B, Landa T, Broxson CS,
Sullivan LF, Rising AC, Foust KD, Zhang Y, Muzyczka N,
Gorbatyuk OS, Scarpace PJ, Mandel RJ. Nigrostriatal
rAAV-mediated GDNF overexpression induces robust
weight loss in a rat model of age-related obesity. Mol Ther
2009; 17: 980–91.
173 Lehtonen E, Bonnaud F, Melas C, Lubansu A, Malgrange B,
Chtarto A, Velu T, Brotchi J, Levivier M, Peschanski M,
Tenenbaum L. AAV2 vectors mediate efficient and
sustained transduction of rat embryonic ventral
mesencephalon. Neuroreport 2002; 13: 1503–7.

