CLINICAL MICROBIOLOGY REVIEWS, Oct. 2008, p. 583–593
0893-8512/08/$08.00⫹0 doi:10.1128/CMR.00008-08
Copyright © 2008, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

Vol. 21, No. 4

Gene Therapy Using Adeno-Associated Virus Vectors
Shyam Daya1 and Kenneth I. Berns1,2*
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, College of Medicine,1 and University of
Florida Genetics Institute,2 University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................................583
BIOLOGY OF AAV ....................................................................................................................................................583
Virus Classification.................................................................................................................................................583
AAV-2 Genome ........................................................................................................................................................583
AAV Life Cycle ........................................................................................................................................................584
AAV-2 Site-Specific Integration ............................................................................................................................584
AAV Infection ..........................................................................................................................................................585
AAV AS A GENE THERAPY VECTOR...................................................................................................................586
Rational Design of AAV Capsids..........................................................................................................................587
Immune Response to AAV .....................................................................................................................................587
AAV CLINICAL TRIALS...........................................................................................................................................588
FUTURE PROSPECTS..............................................................................................................................................590
DISCUSSION ..............................................................................................................................................................591
FINAL COMMENTS..................................................................................................................................................591
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...........................................................................................................................................592
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................................592
AAV-2 Genome

INTRODUCTION
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors are currently among
the most frequently used viral vectors for gene therapy. At
recent meetings of the American Society for Gene Therapy,
nearly half of the presentations involved the use of AAV. This
represents a significant turnaround. Historically, AAV has not
been of great medical interest, because it has not been identified as a pathogen; thus, the lack of widespread knowledge of
the virus initially inhibited its broad use as a vector. Twelve
human serotypes of AAV (AAV serotype 1 [AAV-1] to AAV12) and more than 100 serotypes from nonhuman primates
have been discovered to date. The lack of pathogenicity of the
virus, the persistence of the virus, and the many available
serotypes have increased AAV’s potential as a delivery vehicle
for gene therapy applications. This review will focus on the
biology of AAV and its use as a vector for gene therapy.

The AAV-2 genome is a linear, single-stranded DNA of 4.7
kb (Fig. 1A) (60). Both sense and antisense strands of AAV
DNA are packaged into AAV capsids with equal frequency.
The genome is structurally characterized by 145-bp inverted
terminal repeats (ITRs) that flank two open reading frames
(ORFs) (Fig. 1B).
The first 125 nucleotides of the ITR constitute a palindrome,
which folds upon itself to maximize base pairing and forms a
T-shaped hairpin structure. The other 20 bases, called the D
sequence, remain unpaired. The ITRs are important cis-active
sequences in the biology of AAV. A key role of the ITRs is in
AAV DNA replication. In the current model of AAV replication, the ITR is the origin of replication and serves as a primer
for second-strand synthesis by DNA polymerase. The doublestranded DNA formed during the synthesis, called replicatingform monomer, is used for a second round of self-priming
replication and forms a replicating-form dimer. These doublestranded DNA intermediates (replicating-form monomer and
replicating-form dimer) are processed via a strand displacement mechanism, resulting in single-stranded DNA used for
packaging and double-stranded DNA used for transcription.
Critical to the replication process are the Rep binding elements (RBEs) (RBE and RBE⬘) and a terminal resolution site
(TRS), which is located within the ITR (Fig. 1B). These features are used by the viral regulatory protein Rep during AAV
replication to process the double-stranded intermediates. In
addition to their role in AAV replication, the ITR is also
essential for AAV genome packaging, transcription, negative
regulation under nonpermissive conditions, and site-specific
integration.
The left ORF contains the Rep gene, which produces four
Rep proteins, Rep78, Rep68, Rep52, and Rep40. The larger
Rep proteins (Rep78 and Rep68) are produced from tran-

BIOLOGY OF AAV
Virus Classification
AAV is a small (25-nm), nonenveloped virus that packages
a linear single-stranded DNA genome. It belongs to the family
Parvoviridae and is placed in the genus Dependovirus, because
productive infection by AAV occurs only in the presence of a
helper virus, either adenovirus or herpesvirus. In the absence
of helper virus, AAV (serotype 2) can set up latency by integrating into chromosome 19q13.4, establishing itself as the only
mammalian DNA virus known to be capable of site-specific
integration.

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: P.O. Box 103610, University of Florida Genetics Institute, 1376 Mowry Road, Gainesville, FL
32610-3610. Phone: (352) 273-8072. Fax: (352) 273-8284. E-mail:
kberns@ufl.edu.
583

584

DAYA AND BERNS

CLIN. MICROBIOL. REV.

FIG. 1. Map of the wild-type AAV-2 genome. (A) Rep and Cap genes flanked by ITRs. The different Rep and Cap transcripts are produced
from their respective promoters (P5, P19, and P40). The star indicates the alternative ACG codon used to produce VP3. (B) Secondary structure
of an AAV-2 ITR showing the RBEs (RBE, GAGCGAGCGAGCGCGC; RBE⬘, CTTG) and the TRS (GTTGG).

scripts using the P5 promoter, whereas the smaller Rep proteins (Rep52 and Rep40) are produced from transcripts using
the P19 promoter. Rep78 and Rep68 are produced from unspliced and spliced transcripts, respectively, and are important
regulatory proteins that act in trans in all phases of the AAV
life cycle. Specifically, they positively and negatively regulate
AAV gene expression in the presence or absence of helper
virus, respectively, and are required for DNA replication (48).
The smaller Rep proteins, Rep52 and Rep40, produced from
unspliced and spliced transcripts, respectively, are involved in
the accumulation of single-stranded viral DNA used for packaging within AAV capsids. All four Rep proteins possess helicase and ATPase activity. In addition, the larger Rep proteins
possess strand- and site-specific endonuclease activity (nicking
at the TRS) and site-specific DNA binding activity (binding at
the RBE).
The right ORF contains the Cap gene, which produces three
viral capsid proteins (VP1, VP2, and VP3) using the P40 promoter. Alternative splicing of the P40 transcript is used to
produce the three viral proteins from two transcripts. The
unspliced transcript produces VP1 (87 kDa), the biggest of the
capsid proteins. The spliced transcript produces VP2 (72 kDa)
and VP3 (62 kDa). VP2 is produced using a nonconventional
ACG start codon, whereas VP3 is produced using a downstream conventional AUG codon. The AAV-2 capsid comprises 60 viral capsid proteins arranged into an icosahedral
structure with symmetry equivalent to a triangulation number
of 1. The capsid proteins (VP1, VP2, and VP3) are present in
a 1:1:10 molar ratio.
AAV Life Cycle
There are two stages to the AAV life cycle (Fig. 2) after
successful infection, a lytic stage and a lysogenic stage. In the
presence of helper virus (adenovirus or herpesvirus), the lytic
stage ensues. During this period, AAV undergoes productive
infection characterized by genome replication, viral gene ex-

pression, and virion production. The adenoviral genes that
provide helper functions regarding AAV gene expression have
been identified and include E1a, E1b, E2a, E4, and VA RNA.
Herpesvirus aids in AAV gene expression by providing viral
DNA polymerase and helicase as well as the early functions
necessary for HSV transcription. Although adenovirus and
herpesvirus provide different sets of genes for helper function,
they both regulate cellular gene expression, providing a permissive intracellular milieu for AAV productive infection.
In the absence of adenovirus or herpesvirus, there is limited
AAV replication, viral gene expression is repressed, and the
AAV genome can establish latency by integrating into a 4-kb
region on chromosome 19 (q13.4), termed AAVS1 (36, 37).
The AAVS1 locus is near several muscle-specific genes,
TNNT1 and TNNI3 (16). The AAVS1 region itself is an upstream part of a recently described gene, MBS85. The exact
function of this gene is not clear, but its product has been
shown to be involved in actin organization (64). Whether AAV
integration into this site is suitable for human gene therapy
applications remains to be evaluated. Tissue culture experiments suggest that the AAVS1 locus is a safe integration site.
AAV-2 Site-Specific Integration
One of the features of AAV is its ability to specifically
integrate to establish latent infection. Current AAV vectors do
not have this ability, and the development of such a vector
would ensure long-term transgene expression in tissues without problems associated with insertional mutagenesis.
Some of the viral and cellular requirements for targeted
integration have been elucidated. The AAV components that
are required have been identified. These include the ITRs (in
cis), Rep78 or Rep68 (in trans), and a 138-bp sequence termed
the integration efficiency element (IEE), located within the
P5 promoter in cis (49). It is unclear if the entire 138-bp IEE
in P5 is required, since a recent study showed that a 16-bp RBE
in P5 is sufficient (18). Latent infection with wild-type AAV-2

VOL. 21, 2008

AAV GENE THERAPY

585

FIG. 2. AAV life cycle. AAV undergoes productive infection in the presence of adenovirus coinfection. This is characterized by genome
replication, viral gene expression, and virion production. In the absence of adenovirus, AAV can establish latency by integrating into chromosome
19 (AAVS1). The latent AAV genome can be rescued and replicated upon superinfection by adenovirus. Both stages of AAV’s life cycle are
regulated by complex interactions between the AAV genome and AAV, adenoviral, and host proteins.

appears to be nonpathogenic in tissue culture, when Rep is
expressed under its own promoter. Such expression is regulated by negative feedback. Excess Rep expression has been
shown to arrest cell division (75) and induce cellular apoptosis
(58).
A 33-bp minimum AAVS1 sequence, which contains an
RBE-like and a TRS-like sequence separated by 8 nucleotides,
is necessary and sufficient to target AAV integration (26). The
intervening sequence may be varied, but a central 5⬘ CTC is
required. The actual integration site is somewhat downstream
from the target sequence and can be variable. Many RBEs
have been identified in the human genome, with AAVS1 being
the only site that has an RBE and a TRS in close proximity to
one other. Interestingly, the AAV genome and AAVS1 can be
tethered to each other via Rep68 in vitro (68). These observations provide a molecular explanation for why AAVS1 is targeted, even though the exact mechanism remains unknown.
The process of site-specific integration is not completely
specific even under ideal conditions of Rep78 and Rep68 expression, with approximately 40 to 70% of integrants occurring
in AAVS1. Moreover, the mechanism is imprecise, as judged
by there not being reproducible breakpoints for vector-AAVS1
junctions; however, clusters of integrants appear within a 2-kb
fragment of AAVS1. While the cis- and trans-acting viral factors required for site-specific integration have been identified,
much less is known about cellular factors that are required or
may be involved. Only recently has a study provided evidence
that a cellular protein, human immunodeficiency virus transacting response element-RNA loop binding protein 185 (TRP185), can promote AAV integration into AAVS1 further
downstream from the RBE via interactions with both Rep and
AAVS1 (73). Moreover, site-specific integration has been
demonstrated in mice and rats transgenic for AAVS1, suggesting that the AAVS1 open-chromatin structure is maintained in

vivo and that the cellular factors that mediate site-specific
integration are present in nondividing cells (56).
AAV Infection
AAV-2 gains entry into target cells by using the cellular
receptor heparan sulfate proteoglycan (62). Internalization
is enhanced by interactions with one or more of at least six
known coreceptors including ␣V␤5 integrins (63), fibroblast
growth factor receptor 1 (53), hepatocyte growth factor receptor (35), ␣v␤1 integrin (7), and laminin receptor (3). The
cellular events that mediate AAV trafficking postentry are
not completely characterized. Cells defective for dynamin
significantly hindered AAV-2 infection, suggesting that
AAV is endocytosed into clathrin-coated vesicles (15). For
successful AAV infection, AAV particles need to escape
these endocytic vesicles. Infection experiments with bafilomycin A1 (a drug that inhibits the proton pump for endosomes) suggested that the low pH in the endosomes is essential for virus escape and successful infection (9).
Moreover, cellular signaling involving the activation of the
Rac1 protein and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway
is necessary for intracellular trafficking of AAV particles
using microtubules (57). Interestingly, a conserved phospholipase A2 motif identified in the N terminus of the VP1
protein was reported to be important for successful infection (27). Specifically, the phospholipase A2 motif seemed to
be playing a crucial role during AAV trafficking, possibly
helping AAV escape the late endosome. Mutational analysis
of the AAV capsid structure indicated that the fivefold pore
structure may also serve as the site for phospholipase domain presentation during viral infection (10). Moreover,
endosomal cysteine proteases, cathepsins B and L, have
implied roles in AAV trafficking and capsid disassembly (4).

586

DAYA AND BERNS

CLIN. MICROBIOL. REV.

FIG. 3. (Left) trans-Splicing approach. The head-to-tail formation of two different AAV vector results in functional product after splicing.
(Right) Comparison of scAAV and rAAV vectors.

Exactly how AAV enters the nucleus after escaping the
endosome is not known and is currently an active area of
research. Although AAV is theoretically small enough to
enter the nucleus via the nuclear pore complex, an early
study suggested that AAV entry may be nuclear pore complex independent (29).
AAV AS A GENE THERAPY VECTOR
There are several considerations for any viral vector. These
include the ability to attach to and enter the target cell, successful transfer to the nucleus, the ability to be expressed in the
nucleus for a sustained period of time, and a general lack of
toxicity. AAV vectors have been highly successful in fulfilling
all of these criteria. Moreover, a variety of modifications have
served to enhance their utility. Several considerations have
guided the development of current AAV vectors, especially the
lack of pathogenicity of the wild-type virus and its persistence.
The small size of the AAV genome and concerns about
potential effects of Rep on the expression of cellular genes led
to the construction of AAV vectors that do not encode Rep
and that lack the cis-active IEE, which is required for frequent
site-specific integration. The ITRs are kept because they are
the cis signals required for packaging. Thus, current recombinant AAV (rAAV) vectors persist primarily as extrachromosomal elements (1, 59).
rAAV vectors for gene therapy have been based mostly on
AAV-2. AAV-2-based rAAV vectors can transduce muscle,
liver, brain, retina, and lungs, requiring several weeks for optimal expression. The efficiency of rAAV transduction is dependent on the efficiency at each step of AAV infection: binding, entry, viral trafficking, nuclear entry, uncoating, and
second-strand synthesis. Inefficient AAV trafficking (30) and
second-strand synthesis (19) have been identified as being ratelimiting factors in AAV gene expression. Interestingly, the
binding of cellular protein FKBP52 to the AAV ITR inhibits
second-strand synthesis, and this inhibition is dependent on the

phosphorylation state of FKBP52 (51, 52, 80). Moreover, epidermal growth factor receptor kinase signaling has been implicated in regulating both AAV trafficking and second-strand
synthesis (80).
Several novel AAV vector technologies have been developed to either increase the genome capacity for AAV or enhance gene expression (Fig. 3). The idea of trans-splicing AAV
vectors has been used to increase AAV vector capacity (74).
This system takes advantage of AAV’s ability to form head-totail concatemers via recombination in the ITRs. In this approach, the transgene cassette is split between two rAAV vectors containing adequately placed splice donor and acceptor
sites. Transcription from recombined AAV molecules, followed by the correct splicing of the mRNA transcript, results in
a functional gene product. This application becomes useful for
using AAV to deliver therapeutic genes up to 9 kb in size. trans
splicing has been successfully used for gene expression in the
retina (55), the lung (39), and, more recently, muscle (25).
trans-Splicing vectors are less efficient than rAAV vectors.
The design and use of self-complementary AAV (scAAV)
vectors to bypass the limiting aspects of second-strand synthesis have been described (44). The rationale underlying the
scAAV vector is to shorten the lag time before transgene
expression and potentially to increase the biological efficiency
of the vector. scAAV vectors can fold upon themselves, immediately forming transcriptionally competent double-stranded
DNA. One consequence of the use of scAAV is that the maximal size of the transgene is reduced by ⬃50% (2.4-kb capacity), but up to 3.3 kb of DNA can be encapsidated (71). Rapid
transduction has been observed using scAAV in both tissue
culture and in vivo experiments.
Many clinically relevant tissues are not susceptible to infection by AAV-2. Greater gene expression was seen in muscle,
retina, liver, and heart using AAV serotypes 1, 5, 8, and 9,
respectively. The cell surface receptors have been identified for
only some of the many AAV serotypes: AAV-3 (heparan sul-

VOL. 21, 2008

AAV GENE THERAPY

587

TABLE 1. Capsid homology among AAV serotypes 1 to 9
% Homology to AAV:
AAV

AAV-1
AAV-2
AAV-3
AAV-4
AAV-5
AAV-6
AAV-7
AAV-8
AAV-9

AAV-1

AAV-2

AAV-3

AAV-4

AAV-5

AAV-6

AAV-7

AAV-8

AAV-9

100
83
87
63
58
99
85
84
82

100
88
60
57
83
82
83
82

100
63
58
87
85
86
84

100
53
63
63
63
62

100
58
58
58
57

100
85
84
82

100
88
82

100
85

100

fate proteoglycan), AAV-4 (O-linked sialic acid), and AAV-5
(platelet-derived growth factor receptor). In addition, a 37kDa/67-kDa laminin receptor has been identified as being a
receptor for AAV serotypes 2, 3, 8, and 9 (3). The attachment
receptors for the other serotypes have not yet been identified.
All of these serotypes are potential candidates for testing as
vectors for gene therapy. To date, most of the testing has
involved serotypes 1 to 9, which have considerable differences
at the capsid amino acid sequence level, except for AAV-1 and
AAV-6 (Table 1), and has succeeded in identifying vectors
with widely divergent tissue specificities.
The use of the different AAV serotypes in a pseudotyping
approach (the genome of one ITR serotype being packaged
into a different serotype capsid) has allowed broad tissue tropisms. However, some tissues remain refractory to transduction using available serotypes. This presents a major challenge
for AAV-based gene therapy for clinically relevant tissues.
Rational Design of AAV Capsids
A deeper understanding of the AAV capsid properties has
made the rational design of AAV vectors that display selective
tissue/organ targeting possible, thus broadening the possible
applications for AAV as a gene therapy vector. Two approaches have been used for AAV vector retargeting: (i) direct
targeting and (ii) indirect targeting. In direct targeting, vector
targeting is mediated by small peptides or ligands that have
been directly inserted into the viral capsid sequence. This approach has been used successfully to target endothelial cells
(61, 69). Direct targeting requires extensive knowledge of the
capsid structure. Important aspects involve the following: peptides or ligands must be positioned at sites that are exposed to
the capsid surface, the insertion must not significantly affect
capsid structure and assembly, and it is important that the
native tropism be ablated to maximize targeting.
In indirect targeting, vector targeting is mediated by an associating molecule that interacts with both the viral surface and
the specific cell surface receptor. The use of bispecific antibodies (8) and biotin (6, 50) has been described for AAV vectors.
The advantages of this approach are that different adaptors
can be coupled to the capsid without significant changes in
capsid structure, and the native tropism can be easily ablated.
One disadvantage of using adaptors for targeting may involve
the decreased stability of the capsid-adaptor complex in vivo.
The development of efficient AAV targeting vectors will require a better understanding of all aspects of the AAV infec-

tion process: binding and entry, viral processing, and nuclear
entry and expression. Significant progress has been made in all
these categories, and the development of efficient AAV targeting vectors will expand AAV’s use as a vector for many
clinical applications.
Immune Response to AAV
One of the biggest challenges facing AAV gene delivery is
the host immune response. The host defense mechanism at the
adaptive level is made up of cell-mediated and humoral immunity. The cell-mediated response functions at the cellular
level, eliminating the transduced cells using cytotoxic T cells,
whereas the humoral response produces neutralizing antibodies (Nab), preventing the readministration of vector. Almost
no innate response is seen in AAV infection (76).
Immune response to AAV is primarily a humoral response
(72). Preexisting Nab in patients, because of prior infection,
account for the humoral response seen toward AAV. In a study
by Chirmule et al. (13), antibodies to AAV were seen in 96%
of the subjects (patients with cystic fibrosis [CF] and healthy
subjects), and 32% showed neutralizing ability in an in vitro
assay. Nab to AAV have been to show limit AAV transduction
in liver (47) and lung (28); however, no such effect was seen in
muscle (21), brain (43), and retina (5). Interestingly, the humoral response to AAV may be T-cell dependent; the inhibition of T-cell function using anti-CD4 antibodies prevents Nab
formation and allows vector readministration (14, 28, 40).
Cell-mediated responses to AAV vectors have been documented, but this response may be dependent on the route of
administration (11) and AAV serotype (67). A potent immune
response to AAV-ovalbumin was observed when AAV was
administered intraperitoneally, intravenously, or subcutaneously but not when administered intramuscularly. Moreover,
AAV-2 has been shown to induce a weak cell-mediated immune response. This may be attributed to AAV inefficiently
infecting mature dendritic cells (DC); however, a recent study
demonstrated an efficient infection of immature DC and generated a cytotoxic-T-lymphocyte (CTL) response when used in
adoptive transfer experiments (77). The extent to which mature and immature DC are transduced by AAV in vivo and the
mechanism of how AAV induces a cellular immune response
are not known.
In a recent clinical trial for hemophilia B, an unexpected
liver toxicity was observed and was attributed to a CTL response to AAV-2-transduced hepatocytes (42). Subsequently,

588

CLIN. MICROBIOL. REV.

DAYA AND BERNS

it was discovered that the AAV-2 capsid heparin binding motif
was responsible for T-cell activation (65). This correlated well
with a study in mice that showed that AAV-2 infection can
activate a CTL response, whereas AAV-7 and AAV-8 do not
(67). Moreover, Wang et al. (67) suggested that the crosspresentation of input AAV capsids via major histocompatibility complex class I presentation may be playing a role in the
observed activation of cytotoxic T cells; however, this response
does not diminish transgene expression via the targeted destruction of transduced hepatocytes, a finding confirmed by
another group (38). Taken together, these studies suggest that
immune responses are a major hurdle and that a deeper understanding of AAV-host interactions in humans is required
for the efficient use of AAV as a gene transfer vector.
AAV CLINICAL TRIALS
AAV has become increasingly common as a vector for use in
human clinical trials; as of now, 38 protocols have been approved by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee and
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The increased popularity of AAV vectors reflects the appreciation of the longterm transgene expression observed in animal models and the
relative lack of immune response and other toxicities in the
models. Other factors that have played a role in encouraging
the use of AAV vectors include the discovery of new serotypes
and the appreciation that matching the tissue specificity of the
serotype with the presumptive target tissue can greatly enhance the potential effectiveness of therapy. In general, the
goal of gene therapy can be classified into one of two categories, the correction of an intracellular defect or the synthesis of
a secreted protein, which is active at an extracellular level. In
the latter case, the site of protein synthesis would not seem to
be critical as long as it has no deleterious intracellular effects
and is successfully secreted into blood. This assumption has
been tested in clinical trials in which proteins normally synthesized in the liver are now induced to be produced in skeletal
muscle. Whether the assumption is correct is still not certain,
in part because different vector target sites may induce different host immune responses (41, 42).
Despite the small packaging capacity of AAV vectors, clever
investigators have devised ways of engineering transgenes and
associated regulatory sequences so that their sizes can be reduced sufficiently to allow packaging into AAV capsids. In
general, the expectations with regard to minimal toxicity have
been met, although there have been two notable exceptions to
this, which will be discussed below. To date, no clinical cures
have been effected, although there have been anecdotal data
that have kept hopes up. Trials that have been concluded or
are in progress are listed in Table 2. Several of these will be
discussed below in some detail to illustrate specific points of
interest and concern.
Initial targets for gene therapy included monogenic diseases
in which the gene product either was altered to become nonfunctional or was missing. First among these was CF, a lethal,
autosomal recessive disease in which the CF transmembrane
regulator (CFTR) is inactivated by mutation. CFTR is a component of the Cl⫺ channel and the lack of functional CFTR
affects the transmembrane electrical potential. This leads to
the accumulation of thick secretions in the lung coupled with a

TABLE 2. Clinical trials involving AAV vectors
Condition

CF
Canavan’s disease
Parkinson’s disease
Alzheimer’s disease
Alpha-1-antitrypsin
deficiency
Arthritis
Leber congenital
amaurosis
Hemophilia B
Late infantile neuronal
lipofuscinosis
Muscular dystrophy
Heart failure
Prostate cancer
Epilepsy

Gene product(s)

Phase

CFTR
Aspartoacylase
GAD65, GAD65, AADC,
neurturin
Beta nerve growth factor
AAT

I/II
I
I

TNFR:Fc
RPE65

I
I

Factor IX
CLN2

I
I

Minidystrophin, sarcoglycan
SERCA-2a
Granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factory
Neuropeptide Y

I
I
I/II/III

I
I

I

loss of the normal respiratory epithelial ciliary activity. The
primary difficulty is pulmonary, with an increased incidence of
pulmonary infection, especially by Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Additional difficulty occurs with pancreatic secretion, but the
loss of the pancreatic enzymes can be treated with supplements. Thirteen protocols have been approved for phase I and
phase II clinical trials using an AAV vector (2, 22, 23, 46, 66).
Delivery of the vector was achieved by bronchoscope or by
aerosol into the lung and in several cases by delivery to the
maxillary sinus (to make measurement of the transmembrane
potential, which is affected in CF, possible). The primary and
most important observation in early trials was the lack of measurable toxicity and a very modest immune response evoked by
the route of pulmonary delivery. Serum antibody was evoked
but did not affect the subsequent administration of the vector.
The measurement of efficacy in the lung is pretty much restricted to measures of pulmonary function; any improvement
that was noted in this manner was not statistically significant.
However, in those patients who had vector instilled into the
maxillary sinus, it was possible to make a somewhat more
direct measurement. The most notable effect was an increase
in levels of interleukin-10, a cytokine that is anti-inflammatory,
and a concomitant decrease in levels of interleukin-8, which
has the opposite effect. Major challenges with vector delivery
to the lung through the airway included rapid, regular shedding
of the respiratory epithelium, which means that cells that have
taken up the vector are fairly quickly lost and that the uptake
of the AAV-2 vector in cell culture was mostly through the
basolateral surface, which is not very accessible via the airway.
Thus, consideration must be given to alternative routes of
delivery and the possibility of vectors with alternative serotypes.
A second monogenic disease that could be amenable to gene
therapy is hemophilia. Although this disease can be lethal, it is
functionally chronic with current modes of therapy. The two
common forms are hemophilia A and hemophilia B. Clotting
requires a complex series of enzymatic reactions. Two of the
required enzymes are factors VIII and IX; a lack of the former
results in hemophilia A, and a lack of the latter results in
hemophilia B. Initial efforts concentrated on the replacement

VOL. 21, 2008

of factor IX, because the coding region and regulatory sequences could readily be encapsidated in the AAV vector. A
factor IX AAV vector could be used to “cure” mice with
hemophilia B (31) and, more excitingly, also performed well in
a canine model of hemophilia (32). Initial phase I studies were
performed by the intramuscular injection of an AAV-2 vector
(36, 41). Disappointingly, although no vector toxicity was
noted, no transgenic factor IX could be detected in serum. The
notion had been that although factor IX is normally expressed
in hepatocytes, the expression of factor IX, which could be
excreted, in muscle cells could raise serum factor IX concentration to a therapeutic level (⬃10% of normal). The consequence of the failure to see a rise in the factor IX serum level
was to alter the vector target to the liver, the normal site of
synthesis, with administration via the hepatic artery (42). Vector was administered to the patients in increasing amounts. At
the first two doses, there was no detectable toxicity nor any
detectable transgenic factor IX in the serum. At the highest
dose (2 ⫻ 1012 vector genomes/kg), there was detectable transgenic factor IX in the serum for 4 to 9 weeks in the two
subjects. However, in contrast to what was observed in animal
models, the serum concentration went back to baseline levels.
More troublesome was a rise in liver transaminases in the
serum, a sign of liver inflammation. Subsequently, the inflammatory response was shown to be caused by the induction of a
CTL response (45). The first question was whether the immune response was due to the transgene product or the vector.
It turned out to be due to the AAV capsid. While an antibody
response to capsid had been anticipated, the CTL response to
AAV proteins had not been anticipated, because all AAV
genes had been deleted from the vector. The working hypothesis is that at the highest dose, where the inflammatory response had occurred, the multiplicity of infection (MOI) was
sufficiently high that degradation products of the capsid were
displayed on the surface of the transduced hepatocytes in sufficient quantity to induce the CTL response. Thus, there is a
conundrum: with the vectors used, the dose required to produce a detectable level of factor IX was also sufficient to induce
a CTL response, which destroyed the cells expressing factor
IX. Possible solutions to this problem include being able to
induce tolerance to the AAV capsid fragments displayed on
the surface of the hepatocytes or developing a more efficient
vector, which would enable a much lower MOI or dose so that
a CTL response would not be evoked. The latter may be able
to be achieved by use of alternative AAV serotypes such as
AAV-8 or by modification of the surface of the AAV capsid to
render trafficking of the ingested AAV particle to the cell
nucleus, with ensuing expression of the transgene being much
more efficient. An example of the latter approach will be described below in the section on future prospects for AAV
vectors.
A much more serious problem arose in a clinical trial involving rheumatoid arthritis (33, 70). Rheumatoid arthritis is a
disabling inflammatory disease in which the immune system
reacts against the body’s joint tissue. Current therapy involves
blocking the host response against itself. One way of achieving
this inhibition is to counteract the effects of the cytokine tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-␣) by use of the drug adalimumab
(Humira). Repeated use of the drug is required whenever
there is an exacerbation of the disease in a particular joint. An

AAV GENE THERAPY

589

alternative approach would be to design an AAV vector that
could express a TNF inhibitor for an extended period of time,
with expression located primarily in the joint that had the
vector injected. Promising data were achieved in the animal
model of disease. Unfortunately, in the phase I clinical trial,
one patient became extremely ill the day after the administration of the AAV vector and died within 4 days. Subsequent
investigation established that the patient had died of an overwhelming Histoplasmosis capsulatum fungal infection. The patient had also been treated with adalimumab, one of whose
side effects is known to be sepsis. Thus, the question was what
role, if any, that the AAV vector played in the demise of the
patient. While this was studied, the clinical trial was put on
hold by the FDA. The study showed that the patient had
already had a systemic histoplasmosis infection before the injection of the vector and that this infection was not controlled,
most probably because of adalimumab, which is a systemic
drug. Among the conclusions of the investigation was that the
AAV vector carrying the transgene had not contributed to any
toxicity. The possibility remained that the TNF-␣ inhibitor
expressed from the transgene might have contributed to a
reduction in the ability of the host immune system to combat
the infection; this was deemed to be highly unlikely because
little, if any, of the vector was able to be detected outside of the
joint that had been injected. Thus, in a relatively short period
of time, the FDA essentially exonerated the AAV vector and
permitted the clinical trial to resume.
Parkinson’s disease, a chronic neurodegenerative disease,
has also been an area in which there has been an AAV clinical
trial. In Parkinson’s disease, a loss of dopaminergic neurons
leads to the loss of inhibitory gamma aminobutyric acid-sensitive input to the subthalamic nucleus. Kaplitt et al. (34) and
Feigin et al. (17) described a study in which 12 patients with
advanced Parkinson’s disease had an AAV vector carrying a
transgene encoding glutamic acid decarboxylase injected into
the subthalamic nucleus on one side. The therapy was well
tolerated, with no adverse effects attributable to gene therapy
noted for any of the patients, who had been divided into three
groups that received low, moderate, or high doses of the vector. The clinical impression was that motor activity on the
treated side was improved significantly relative to the untreated side regardless of dose. No change in cognition was
noted. The clinical impression was supported by position emission tomography scan data, which measured the reduced metabolic activity on the treated side, consistent with enhanced
inhibition. Of particular interest was that motor improvement
was not noted until 3 months postinjection so that it did not
seem directly related to trauma associated with the injection.
Also very encouraging was that the observed improvement in
motor activity persisted for at least 1 year. Although the trial
involved an open surgical procedure, the dramatic improvements noted, if consistent and reproducible, suggest that AAV
gene therapy for chronic, degenerative neurological diseases
has great promise. Additional clinical trials for Parkinson’s
disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and Batten disease have been
approved.
From these three examples of the 38 clinical trials that have
been approved, two approaches can be noted. On one hand,
the original notion of replacing a defective gene in a monogenic disease is exemplified by the trials involving patients with

590

DAYA AND BERNS

CF or hemophilia B. The second approach is demonstrated in
the Parkinson’s disease trial, in which the intention was to
block the consequences of a chronic disease characterized
more by a metabolic defect caused by the lack of dopaminergic
neurons rather than a “cure” of the primary lesion.
Two inferences can be drawn from those clinical trials that
have already been done. The first is that there has been relatively little toxicity that can be directly attributed to the AAV
vector platform. The one area of potential toxicity appears to
arise from an inflammatory response involving cytotoxic T cells
responding to fragments of the coat proteins from input vector
that are presented on the cell surface as major histocompatibility complexes. This has been observed when very high doses
of vector were given via the hepatic artery or by intramuscular
injection. It is a particularly complex reaction, because dosage,
location of injection, and the possibility of induction of tolerance all have to be taken into consideration. Humoral immunity seems to play a role in some instances when the subsequent administration of a vector may be blocked, but toxicity
per se has not been a significant observation. Again, the route
of administration seems to be important; little humoral immunity has been noted when the pulmonary route is used. The
ability of humoral antibody to block vector activity is significant
because the seropositivity of the population to AAV is high
(⬃80 to 90% for AAV-2). However, the discovery of many new
AAV serotypes and the ability to package the AAV-2-based
vector DNA into many, if not most, of them suggest that
preexisting humoral immunity will not pose a significant barrier to therapy.
FUTURE PROSPECTS
Although significant progress has been made in the use of
AAV vectors for human gene therapy, several developments
are likely to enhance the potential utility of the system. The
host immune response remains of concern so that approaches
to mitigate the response would constitute a definite advance.
One such approach would be to reduce the vector dose required for a therapeutic response. The discovery of additional
AAV serotypes is one possibility (24). Another is to modify the
surface of the vector capsid to include specific ligands for
attachment to target tissues (see “Rational Design of AAV
Capsids”). Recently, an alternative approach was described by
Srivastava et al. (79). The particle-to-infectivity ratio of AAV
vector preparations usually ranges from 10:1 to 100:1. These
ratios reflect, in part, incomplete or empty vector particles.
However, an additional reason for the high ratios includes
trafficking from the endocytoplasmic vesicle to the nucleus. In
the course of trafficking, the vector particle may become ubiquitinated and thus directed to a proteasome for degradation
rather than to the nucleus, where the transgene may be expressed. Srivastava’s group found that ubiquitinylation and
direction to the proteasome require the phosphorylation of
tyrosine residues on the surface of the vector capsid. There are
seven tyrosines on the surface of the AAV-2 capsid, and Srivastava et al. (A. Srivastava et al., unpublished data) systematically replaced each of these tyrosine residues with phenylalanine. The consequence of these modifications is that the
MOI required for the detection of transgene expression has
been greatly reduced, both in cell culture and in several mouse

CLIN. MICROBIOL. REV.

models of transduction of cells in the liver and eye. This innovation is likely to greatly enhance the ability to increase transgene expression in several diseases to therapeutic levels.
One of the most attractive features of current AAV vectors
is the continued expression of the transgene for prolonged
periods of time. This is in spite of the extrachromosomal location of the vector. However, the infrequent integration of the
vector means that transduction must occur in cells that either
do not turn over or do so very slowly. Additionally, the rarity of
integration reduces the likelihood of insertional mutagenesis,
but the possibility does remain. Recent experience with the
induction of leukemia in patients in two clinical trials who were
successfully treated for severe combined immunodeficiency
disease with retroviral vectors has heightened awareness of the
problem (20). Although AAV vectors seem to be highly unlikely to cause such problems in postmitotic tissues, the issue
remains of some concern. In contrast to the wild-type AAV
genomes, recombinant AAV vector genomes do not integrate
site specifically into chromosome 19 in human cells in vitro and
have been shown to remain episomal in animal models in vivo.
However, all previous studies were carried out with cells and
tissues that are postmitotic. In hematopoietic stem cells, which
must proliferate and differentiate to give rise to progenitor
cells, recombinant AAV genomes would be lost in the absence
of stable integration into chromosomal DNA. Srivastava and
colleagues, using a murine bone marrow serial transplant
model in vivo, documented the stable integration of the proviral genomes, and integration sites were localized to different
mouse chromosomes (A. Srivastava et al., unpublished data).
None of the integration sites was found to be in a transcribed
gene or near a cellular oncogene. All animals monitored for up
to 1 year exhibited no pathological abnormalities. Thus, an
AAV proviral integration-induced risk of oncogenesis was not
found in these studies.
One of the features of AAV is its ability to specifically
integrate into chromosome 19q13.4 to establish latent infection. Current AAV vectors do not have this ability because
they lack both the cis-active signal in P5 (IEE) and the transactive proteins (Rep68 and Rep78) required for site-specific
integration. The development of such a vector would enable
the transduction of germ or progenitor cells and thus help to
ensure long-term transgene expression in tissues where cell
turnover is a consideration. If transduction were done ex vivo,
it would theoretically be possible to clone cells in which sitespecific integration had occurred in the absence of significant,
additional random integration. Appropriate vector design
would allow the rep gene to be expressed during transduction
but not itself be incorporated. Two such vectors were described: one is an AAV/adenovirus hybrid (54), and the other
is a bipartite AAV vector (78). In the latter case, Rep is
expressed from one component, and the second component
contains the cis-active IEE. Both systems are promising but in
early stages of development.
Another area with great potential for improvement is the
route of administration. This is particularly true for the use of
AAV vectors in the central nervous system (CNS). Currently,
vector administration requires an open neurosurgical procedure. This is true because of the blood-brain barrier and because of the desire to target specific areas of the CNS. The
development of vectors that could achieve the required target-

VOL. 21, 2008

AAV GENE THERAPY

ing specificity and the ability to penetrate the blood-brain barrier would greatly facilitate CNS gene therapy. A number of
different methods have been suggested and tried with limited
success to date.
Other possible advances include a better understanding of
the host response and the requirements for the induction of
tolerance and the development of more efficient systems for
the production of AAV vectors (12).
DISCUSSION
Gene therapy requires three things: the identification of the
defect at the molecular level, a correcting gene, and a way to
introduce the gene into appropriate host cells (i.e., a vector).
We now have a sophisticated understanding of the basic mechanisms of many genetic diseases, and many corresponding
genes have been cloned and can be produced at high levels.
The major hurdle to be surmounted is the development of
adequate vectors. The wide variety of approaches that have
been tried, many of which are still being studied, points to the
challenge of developing effective vectors. The delivery methods
that have been tried include purified DNA under hydrodynamic pressure, the shotgun approach using DNA adhering to
gold particles, lipid-DNA complexes, and, finally, virus-based
vectors. Although the first three methods have an inherent
simplicity that is attractive, in practice, the efficiency of gene
delivery and expression has been lower than what is required
for therapeutic efficacy. Viruses, on the other hand, represent
nature’s vectors for the delivery and expression of exogenous
genes in host cells. Here, the challenge is to maintain the
efficiency of delivery and expression while minimizing any
pathogenicity of the virus from which the vector was derived.
In practice, the challenge has been significant. In the only
clearly documented instance of therapeutic correction of an
inborn error, the inherent oncogenic properties of the original
virus (Moloney murine leukemia virus) were retained; 4 of 12
patients with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency disease developed leukemia. In this experiment, bone marrow
precursor cells were transduced and allowed to differentiate.
Under these conditions, a vector that would integrate was
needed.
Among current viral vectors, only those derived from retroviruses have the ability to integrate at a reasonable frequency;
retroviruses require cell division for integration to occur,
whereas lentiviruses and foamy viruses can enter the nucleus
and integrate in nondividing cells. Lentiviral vectors carry the
psychological burden of being derived from significant pathogens, but foamy viruses infect a high percentage of humans
without having been implicated as the cause of disease. Although there are production challenges, very promising results
have been obtained in a canine model of congenital granulomatosis. The overriding theoretical consideration is that retroviruses integrate at many sites in the human genome, so there
is always the concern of insertional mutagenesis possibly causing oncogenesis.
AAV-2, and presumably other serotypes, has been reported
to integrate at a specific site in the q arm of chromosome 19
(AAVS1). The frequency with which integration occurs in
AAVS1 has been reported to be from 60 to 90%. This exceeds
the frequency that has been observed, with the most successful

591

vectors being derived from bacteriophage systems. However,
current AAV vectors do not have this ability (they lack the
sequences required both in trans and in cis), and integration,
which has been observed to occur at a low frequency (10⫺7), is
random. As discussed above (Future Prospects), it is possible
to design AAV vectors that can integrate in a site-specific
manner; therefore, a DNA virus vector is possible.
AAV was initially considered as a vector by only a few
laboratories. This undoubtedly reflected the lack of familiarity
with the virus, since it is nonpathogenic and, thus, of interest
only to those inherently interested in its distinctive biology.
However, as noted above, with time, it has become among the
most commonly used viral vectors. This is likely the consequence of several factors. First, almost all other viral vectors
lead to an initial burst of transgene expression that commonly
disappears after a relatively short time, measured in weeks.
AAV transgene expression, on the other hand, frequently persists for years or the life time of the animal model. Second,
other viral vectors have a greater capacity with which to insert
the transgene(s). However, with time and clever engineering, it
has been possible to insert originally very large transgenes into
AAV vectors. Interestingly, it has also proved to be feasible to
have split vectors in which one construct has slight sequence
overlap with a second construct so that recombination after
vector nuclear entry leads to the intact transgene product being
expressed. Thus, the consequences of the small size of the
AAV genome have been overcome to a large extent.
Another significant positive feature of AAV vectors is that
they frequently do not elicit a deleterious immune response.
This feature is dependent on the site of administration and the
effective MOI of the vector used. Another factor is that AAV
appears to be taken up poorly by dendritic cells. Finally, the
small capacity of the genome has meant that no viral genes
remain. In a parallel manner, the latest version of adenovirus
vectors is the gutless vectors from which all viral genes have
also been removed. Interestingly, the gutless adenovirus vectors still do not perform as well as AAV vectors in terms of
expression persistence. It is tempting to speculate that the
difference reflects the special structure of the AAV ITR, which
could serve both as an insulator and to protect against cellular
exonucleases.
Thus, AAV has become appreciated as a good vector for the
transduction of postmitotic cells. At this time, retroviral vectors remain the vector of choice for the transduction of stem or
progenitor cells despite the inherent concern of possible oncogenesis. These considerations apply for situations in which
long-term transgene expression is desired. In cases such as
immunization or vector-induced oncolysis, where expression at
higher levels for relatively short periods of time is desirable,
other viral vectors such as those derived from adenovirus and
herpesvirus have more useful characteristics. What has become
apparent is that different vectors have characteristics that are
advantageous in specific cases. Thus, the notion of best vector
depends on the question of what is best for what purpose.
FINAL COMMENTS
AAV remains a promising delivery system for the realization
of the dream of gene therapy. It compares favorably to other
viral vectors, especially when sustained transgene expression is

592

DAYA AND BERNS

desired. Although nonviral vector systems such as lipid-mediated vectors, hydrodynamic delivery, and the gene gun have
been advocated and tried, to date, none have approached the
efficacy of the viral delivery systems. Whether such development will occur remains unknown. AAV vectors have achieved
some success, and it seems likely that some of the advances
described above and others not yet envisioned will enable
AAV to become an effective therapeutic agent.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank A. Srivastava for his helpful suggestions.
The work was supported in part by a grant from the USPHS, grant
DK58327.
REFERENCES
1. Afione, S. A., C. K. Conrad, W. G. Kearns, S. Chunduru, R. Adams, T. C.
Reynolds, W. B. Guggino, G. R. Cutting, B. J. Carter, and T. R. Flotte. 1996.
In vivo model of adeno-associated virus vector persistence and rescue. J. Virol. 70:3235–3241.
2. Aitken, M. L., R. B. Moss, D. A. Waltz, M. E. Dovey, M. R. Tonelli, S. C.
McNamara, R. L. Gibson, B. W. Ramsey, B. J. Carter, and T. C. Reynolds.
2001. A phase I study of aerosolized administration of tgAAVCF to cystic
fibrosis subjects with mild lung disease. Hum. Gene Ther. 12:1907–1916.
3. Akache, B., D. Grimm, K. Pandy, S. R. Yant, Y. Xu, and M. A. Kay. 2006. The
37/67-kilodalton laminin receptor is a receptor for adeno-associated virus
serotypes 8, 2, 3, and 9. J. Virol. 80:9831–9836.
4. Akache, B., D. Grimm, X. Shen, S. Fuess, S. R. Yant, D. S. Glazer, J. Park,
and M. A. Kay. 2007. A two-hybrid screen identifies cathepsin B and L as
uncoating factors for adeno-associated virus 2 and 8. Mol. Ther. 15:330–339.
5. Anand, V., B. Duffy, Z. Yang, N. S. Dejneka, A. M. Maguire, and J. Bennett.
2002. A deviant immune response to viral proteins and transgene product is
generated on subretinal administration of adenovirus and adeno-associated
virus. Mol. Ther. 5:125–132.
6. Arnold, G. S., A. K. Sasser, M. D. Stachler, and J. S. Bartlett. 2006. Metabolic biotinylation provides a unique platform for the purification and targeting of multiple AAV vectors serotypes. Mol. Ther. 14:97–106.
7. Asokan, A., J. B. Hamra, L. Govindasamy, M. Agbandje-McKenna, and R. J.
Samulski. 2006. Adeno-associated virus type 2 contains an integrin ␣5␤1
binding domain essential for viral cell entry. J. Virol. 80:8961–8969.
8. Bartlett, J. S., J. Kleinschmidt, R. C. Boucher, and R. J. Samulski. 1999.
Targeted adeno-associated virus vector transduction of nonpermissive cells
mediated by a bispecific F(ab⬘gamma)2 antibody. Nat. Biotechnol. 17:181–
186.
9. Bartlett, J. S., R. Wilcher, and R. J. Samulski. 2000. Infectious entry pathways of adeno-associated virus and adeno-associated virus vectors. J. Virol.
74:2777–2785.
10. Bleker, S., F. Sonntage, and J. A. Kleinschmidt. 2005. Mutational analysis of
narrow pores at the fivefold symmetry axes of adeno-associated virus type 2
capsids reveal a dual role in genome packaging and activation of phospholipase A2 activity. J. Virol. 79:2528–2540.
11. Brockstedt, D. G., G. M. Podsakoff, L. Fong, G. Kurtzman, W. MuellerRuchholtz, and E. G. Engleman. 1999. Induction of immunity to antigens
expressed by recombinant adeno-associated virus depends on route of administration. Clin. Immunol. 92:67–75.
12. Cao, O., C. Furlan-Frequia, V. R. Arruda, and R. W. Herzong. 2007. Emerging role of regulatory T cells in gene transfer. Curr. Gene Ther. 7:381–390.
13. Chirmule, N., K. J. Propert, S. A. Magosin, Y. Qian, R. Qian, and J. M.
Wilson. 1999. Immune response to adenovirus and adeno-associated virus in
humans. Gene Ther. 6:1574–1583.
14. Chirmule, N., W. Xiao, A. Truneh, M. A. Schnell, J. V. Hughes, P. Zoltick,
and J. M. Wilson. 2000. Humoral immunity to adeno-associated virus type 2
vectors following administration to murine and non-human primate muscle.
J. Virol. 74:2420–2425.
15. Duan, D., Q. Li, A. W. Kao, Y. Yue, J. E. Pessin, and J. F. Engelhardt. 1999.
Dynamin is required for recombinant adeno-associated virus type 2 infection. J. Virol. 73:10371–10376.
16. Dutheil, N., F. Shi, T. Dupressoir, and R. M. Linden. 2000. Adeno-associated virus site-specifically integrates into a muscle-specific DNA region.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:4862–4866.
17. Feigin, A., M. G. Kaplitt, C. Tang, T. Lin, P. Mattis, V. Dhawan, M. J.
During, and D. Eidelberg. 2007. Modulation of metabolic brain networks
after subthalamic gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 104:19559–19564.
18. Feng, D., J. Chen, Y. Yue, H. Zhu, J. Xue, and W. W. Jia. 2006. A 16bp rep
binding element is sufficient for mediating rep-dependent integration into
AAVS1. J. Mol. Biol. 358:38–45.
19. Ferrari, F. K., T. Samulski, T. Shenk, and R. J. Samulski. 1996. Second-

CLIN. MICROBIOL. REV.
strand synthesis is a rate-limiting step for efficient transduction by recombinant adeno-associated virus vectors. J. Virol. 70:3227–3234.
20. Fischer, A., S. Hacein-Bey-Abina, C. Lagresle, A. Garrigue, and M.
Cavazana-Calvo. 2005. Gene therapy of severe combined immunodeficiency
disease: proof of efficiency and safety issues. Bull. Acad. Natl. Med. 189:
779–785. (In French.)
21. Fisher, K. J., K. Jooss, J. Alston, Y. Yang, S. E. Haecker, K. High, R. Pathak,
S. E. Raper, and J. M. Wilson. 1997. Recombinant adeno-associated virus for
muscle directed gene therapy. Nat. Med. 3:306–312.
22. Flotte, T. R., B. Carter, C. Conrad, W. Guggino, T. Reynolds, B. Rosenstein,
G. Taylor, S. Walden, and R. Wetzel. 1996. A phase I study of an adenoassociated virus-CFTR gene vector in adult CF patients with mild lung
disease. Hum. Gene Ther. 7:1145–1149.
23. Flotte, T. R., P. L. Zeitlin, T. C. Reynolds, A. E. Heald, P. Pedersen, S. Beck,
C. K. Conrad, L. Brass-Ernst, M. Humphries, K. Sullivan, R. Wetzel, G.
Taylor, B. J. Carter, and W. B. Guggino. 2003. Phase I trial of intranasal and
endobronchial administration of a recombinant adeno-associated virus serotype 2 (rAAV2)-CFTR vector in adult cystic fibrosis patients: a two-part
clinical study. Hum. Gene Ther. 14:1079–1088.
24. Gao, G., L. H. Vandenberge, and J. M. Wilson. 2005. New recombinant
serotypes of AAV vectors. Curr. Gene Ther. 5:285–297.
25. Ghosh, A., Y. Yue, and D. Dongsheng. 2006. Viral serotype and transgene
sequence overlapping adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector-mediated gene
transfer in skeletal muscle. J. Gen. Med. 8:298–305.
26. Giraud, C., E. Winocour, and K. I. Berns. 1994. Site-specific integration by
adeno-associated virus is directed by a cellular DNA sequence. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 91:10039–10043.
27. Girod, A., C. E. Wobus, Z. Zadori, M. Ried, K. Leike, P. Tijssen, J. A.
Kleinschmidt, and M. Hallek. 2002. The VP1 capsid protein of adenoassociated virus type 2 is carrying a phospholipase A2 domain required for
virus infectivity. J. Gen. Virol. 83:973–978.
28. Halbert, C. L., T. A. Standaert, C. B. Wilson, and A. D. Miller. 1998.
Successful readministration of adeno-associated virus vectors to the mouse
lung requires transient immunosuppression during the initial exposure. J. Virol. 72:9795–9805.
29. Hansen, J., K. Qing, and A. Srivastava. 2001. Infection of purified nuclei by
adeno-associated virus 2. Mol. Ther. 4:289–296.
30. Hauck, B., W. Zhao, K. High, and W. Xiao. 2004. Intracellular viral processing, not single-stranded DNA accumulation, is crucial for recombinant
adeno-associated virus transduction. J. Virol. 78:13678–13686.
31. Herzog, R. W., J. N. Hagstrom, S. H. Kung, S. J. Tai, J. M. Wilson, K. J.
Fisher, and K. A. High. 1997. Stable gene transfer and expression of human
blood coagulation factor IX after intramuscular injection of recombinant
adeno-associated virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:5804–5809.
32. Herzog, R. W., E. Y. Yang, L. B. Couto, J. N. Hagstrom, D. Elwell, P. A.
Fields, M. Burton, D. A. Bellinger, M. S. Read, K. M. Brinkhous, G. M.
Podsakoff, T. C. Nichols, G. J. Kurtzman, and K. A. High. 1999. Long-term
correction of hemophilia B by gene transfer of blood coagulation factor IX
mediated by adeno-associated viral vector. Nat. Med. 5:56–63.
33. Kaiser, J. 2007. Gene transfer an unlikely contributor to patient’s death.
Science 318:1535.
34. Kaplitt, M. G., A. Feigin, C. Tang, H. L. Fitzsimons, P. Mattis, P. A. Lawlor,
R. J. Bland, D. Young, K. Strybind, D. Eidelberg, and M. J. During. 2007.
Safety and tolerability of gene therapy with an adeno-associated virus (AAV)
borne GAD gene for Parkinson’s disease: an open label, phase I trial. Lancet
369:2097–2105.
35. Kashiwakura, Y., K. Tamayose, K. Iwabuchi, Y. Hirai, T. Shimada, K.
Matsumoto, T. Nakamura, K. Oshimi, and H. Daida. 2005. Hepatocyte
growth factor receptor is a co-receptor for adeno-associated virus type 2
infection. J. Virol. 79:609–614.
36. Kay, M. S., C. S. Manno, M. V. Ragni, P. J. Larson, L. B. Couto, A.
McClelland, B. Glader, A. J. Chew, S. J. Tai, R. W. Herzog, V. Arruda, F.
Johnson, C. Scallan, E. Skarsgard, A. W. Flake, and K. A. High. 2000.
Evidence for gene transfer and expression of factor IX in hemophilia B
patients treated with an AAV vector. Nat. Genet. 24:257–261.
37. Kotin, R. M., M. Siniscalco, R. J. Samuslki, X. D. Zhu, L. Hunter, C. A.
Laughlin, S. McLaughlin, N. Muzyczka, M. Rocchi, and K. I. Berns. 1990.
Site-specific integration by adeno-associated virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 87:2211–2215.
38. Li, H., S. L. Murphy, W. Giles-Davis, S. Edmonson, Z. Xiang, Li, Y., M. O.
Lasaro, K. A. High, and H. C. Ertl. 2007. Pre-existing AAV capsid specific
CD8⫹ T cells are unable to eliminate AAV-transduced hepatocytes. Mol.
Ther. 15:792–800.
39. Liu, X., M. Luo, L. N. Zhang, Z. Yan, R. Zak, W. Ding, S. G. Mansfield, L. G.
Mitchell, and J. F. Engelhardt. 2005. Spliceosome-mediated RNA transsplicing with recombinant adeno-associated virus partially restores cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator function to polarized human
cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells. Hum. Gene Ther. 16:1116–1123.
40. Manning, W. C., S. Zhou, M. P. Bland, J. A. Escobedo, and V. Dwarki. 1998.
Transient immunosuppression allows transgene expression following readministration of adeno-associated viral vectors. Hum. Gene Ther. 9:477–485.
41. Manno, C. S., A. J. Chew, S. Hutchison, P. J. Larson, R. W. Herzog, V. R.

VOL. 21, 2008
Arruda, S. J. Tai, M. V. Ragni, A. Thompson, M. Ozelo, L. B. Couto, D. G.
Leonard, F. A. Johnson, A. McClelland, C. Scallan, E. Skarsgard, A. W.
Flake, M. A. Kay, K. A. High, and B. Glader. 2003. AAV-mediated factor IX
gene transfer to skeletal muscle in patients with severe hemophilia B. Blood
101:2963–2972.
42. Manno, C. S., G. F. Pierce, V. R. Arruda, B. Glader, M. Ragni, J. J. Rasko,
M. C. Ozelo, K. Hoots, P. Blatt, B. Konkle, M. Dake, R. Kaye, M. Razavi, A.
Zajko, J. Zehnder, P. K. Rustagi, H. Nakai, A. Chew, D. Leonard, J. F.
Wright, R. R. Lessard, J. M. Sommer, M. Tigges, B. Sabatino, A. Luk, H.
Jiang, F. Mingossi, L. Couto, H. C. Ertl, K. A. High, and M. A. Kay. 2006.
Successful transduction of liver in hemophilia by AAV-factor IX and limitations imposed by the host immune response. Nat. Med. 12:342–347.
43. Mastakov, M. Y., K. Baer, C. W. Symes, C. B. Leichtlein, R. M. Kotin, and
M. J. During. 2002. Immunological aspects of recombinant adeno-associated
virus delivery to the mammalian brain. J. Virol. 76:8446–8454.
44. McCarty, D. M., P. E. Monahan, and R. J. Samulski. 2001. Self complementary recombinant adeno-associated virus (scAAV) vectors promote efficient transduction independently of DNA synthesis. Gene Ther. 16:1248–
1254.
45. Mingozzi, F., M. V. Maus, D. J. Hui, D. E. Sabatino, S. L. Murphy, J. E.
Rasko, M. V. Ragni, C. S. Manno, J. Sommer, H. Jiang, G. F. Perce, H. C.
Ertl, and K. A. High. 2007. CD8(⫹) T-cell responses to adeno-associated
virus capsid in humans. Nat. Med. 13:419–422.
46. Moss, R. B., D. Rodman, L. T. Spencer, M. L. Aitken, P. L. Zeitlin, D. Waltz,
C. Milla, A. S. Brody, J. P. Clancy, B. Ramsey, N. Hamblett, and D. Milla.
2004. Repeated adeno-associated virus serotype 2 aerosol-mediated cystic
fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene transfer to the lungs of patients with
cystic fibrosis; a multicenter, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Chest
125:509–521.
47. Murphy, S. L., H. Li, S. Zhou, A. Schlachterman, and K. High. 2008.
Prolonged susceptibility to antibody-mediated neutralization for adeno-associated vectors targeted to the liver. Mol. Ther. 16:138–145.
48. Pereira, D. J., D. M. McCarty, and N. Muzyczka. 1997. The adeno-associated
virus (AAV) Rep protein acts as both a repressor and an activator to
regulate AAV transcription during a productive infection. J. Virol. 71:1079–
1088.
49. Philpott, N. J., J. Gomos, K. I. Berns, and E. Falck-Pedersen. 2002. A p5
integration efficiency element mediates rep-dependent integration into
AAVS1 at chromosome 19. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:12381–12385.
50. Ponnazhagen, S., G. Mahendra, S. Kumar, J. A. Thompson, and M. Castillas, Jr. 2002. Conjugate-based targeting of recombinant adeno-associated
virus type 2 vector using avidin-linked ligands. J. Virol. 76:12900–12907.
51. Qing, K., J. Hansen, K. A. Weigel-Kelley, M. Tan, S. Zhou, and A. Srivastava. 2001. Adeno-associated virus type 2-mediated gene transfer: role of
cellular FKBP52 protein in transgene expression. J. Virol. 75:8968–8976.
52. Qing, K., W. Li, L. Zhong, M. Tan, J. Hansen, K. A. Wiegel-Kelly, L. Chen,
M. C. Yoder, and A. Srivastava. 2003. Adeno-associated virus type 2-mediated gene transfer: role of cellular T-cell protein tyrosine phosphatase in
transgene expression in established cell lines in vitro and transgenic mice in
vivo. J. Virol. 77:2741–2746.
53. Qing, K., C. Mah, J. Hansen, S. Zhou, V. Dwarki, and A. Srivastava. 1999.
Human fibroblast growth factor 1 is a co-receptor for infection by adenoassociated virus 2. Nat. Med. 5:71–77.
54. Recchia, A., L. Perani, D. Sartori, C. Olgiati, and F. Malvilio. 2004. Sitespecific integration of functional transgenes into the human genome by
adeno/AAV hybrid vectors. Mol. Ther. 10:660–670.
55. Reich, S. J., A. Auricchio, M. Hildinger, E. Glover, A. M. Maguire, J. M.
Wilson, and J. Bennett. 2003. Efficient trans-splicing in the retina expands
the utility of adeno-associated virus as a vector for gene therapy. Hum. Gene
Ther. 14:37–44.
56. Rizzuto, G., B. Gorgoni, M. Cappelletti, D. Lazzaro, G. Ciliberto, I. Gloaguen, V. Poli, A. Sgura, D. Cimini, R. Cortese, E. Fattori, and N. La Monica.
1999. Development of animal models for adeno-associated virus site-specific
integration. J. Virol. 73:2517–2526.
57. Sanlioglu, S., P. K. Benson, J. Yang, E. M. Atkinson, T. Reynolds, and J. F.
Engelhardt. 2000. Endocytosis and nuclear trafficking of adeno-associated
virus type 2 are controlled by Rac1 and phophatidylinositol-3 kinase activation. J. Virol. 74:9184–9196.
58. Schmidt, M., S. Afione, and R. M. Kotin. 2000. Adeno-associated virus type
2 Rep78 induces apoptosis through caspase activation independently of p53.
J. Virol. 74:9441–9450.
59. Schnepp, B. C., R. L. Jensen, C. L. Chen, P. R. Johnson, and K. R. Clark.

AAV GENE THERAPY

593

2005. Characterization of adeno-associated virus genomes isolated from
human tissues. J. Virol. 79:4793–4803.
60. Srivastava, A., E. W. Lusby, and K. I. Berns. 1983. Nucleotide sequence and
organization of the adeno-associated virus 2 genome. J. Virol. 45:555–564.
61. Stachler, M. D., and J. S. Bartlett. 2006. Mosaic vectors comprised of
modified AAV 1 capsid proteins for efficient vector purification and targeting to vascular endothelial cells. Gene Ther. 13:926–931.
62. Summerford, C., and R. J. Samulski. 1998. Membrane-associated heparin
sulfate proteoglycan is a receptor for adeno-associated virus type 2 virions.
J. Virol. 72:1438–1445.
63. Summerford, C., and J. S. Bartlett, and R. J. Samulski. 1999. ␣V␤5 integrin:
a co-receptor for adeno-associated virus type 2 infection. Nat. Med. 5:78–82.
64. Tan, I., C. H. Ng, L. Lim, and T. Leung. 2001. Phosphorylation of a novel
myosin binding subunit of protein phosphatase 1 reveals a conserved mechanism in the regulation of actin cytoskeleton. J. Biol. Chem. 276:21209–
21216.
65. Vandenberghe, L. H., L. Wang, S. Somanathan, Y. Zhi, J. Figueredo, R.
Calcedo, J. Sanmiguel, R. A. Desai, C. S. Chen, J. Johnston, R. L. Grant,
G. P. Gao, and J. M. Wilson. 2006. Heparin binding directs activation of
T-cells against adeno-associated virus serotype 2 capsid. Nat. Med. 12:967–
971.
66. Wagner, J. A., T. Reynolds, M. L. Moran, R. B. Moss, J. J. Wine, T. R. Flotte,
and P. Gardner. 1998. Efficient and persistent gene transfer of AAV-CFTR
in maxillary sinus. Lancet 351:1702–1703.
67. Wang, L., J. Figueredo, R. Calcedo, J. Lin, and J. M. Wilson. 2007. Crosspresentation of adeno-associated virus serotype 2 capsids activated cytotoxic
T cells but does not render hepatocytes effective cytolytic targets. Hum.
Gene Ther. 18:185–194.
68. Weitzman, M. D., S. Kyostio, R. M. Kotin, and R. A. Owens. 1994. Adenoassociated virus (AAV) rep proteins mediate complex formation between
AAV DNA and its integration site in human DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 91:5808–5812.
69. White, S. J., S. A. Nicklin, H. Buning, M. J. Brosnan, K. Leike, E. D.
Papadakis, M. Hallek, and A. H. Baker. 2004. Targeted gene delivery to
vascular tissue in vivo by tropism-modified adeno-associated virus vectors.
Circulation 109:513–519.
70. Williams, D. 2007. A RAC reviews serious adverse event associated with
AAV therapy trial. Mol. Ther. 15:2053.
71. Wu, J., W. Zhao, L. Zhong, Z. Han, B. Li, W. Ma, K. A. Weigel-Kelley, K. H.
Warrington, and A. Srivastava. 2007. Self-complementary recombinant
adeno-associated viral vectors: packaging capacity and the role of the rep
proteins in vectors purity. Hum. Gene Ther. 18:171–182.
72. Xiao, X., J. Li, and R. J. Samulski. 1996. Efficient long-term gene transfer
into muscle of immunocompetent mice by adeno-associated virus vectors.
J. Virol. 70:8098–8108.
73. Yamamoto, N., M. Suzuki, M. A. Kawano, T. Inoue, R. U. Takahashi, H.
Tsukamoto, T. Enomoto, Y. Yamaguchi, T. Wada, and H. Handa. 2007.
Adeno-associated virus site-specific integration is regulated by TRP-185.
J. Virol. 81:1990–2001.
74. Yan, Z., Y. Zhang, D. Duan, and J. F. Engelhardt. 2000. trans-Splicing
vectors expand utility of adeno-associated virus for gene therapy. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 97:6716–6721.
75. Yang, Q., F. Chen, and J. P. Trempe. 1994. Characterization of cell lines that
inducibly express the adeno-associated virus Rep proteins. J. Virol. 68:4847–
4856.
76. Zaiss, A. K., Q. Liu, G. P. Bowen, N. C. Wong, J. S. Bartlett, and D. A.
Muruve. 2002. Differential activation of innate immune response by adenovirus and adeno-associated virus vectors. J. Virol. 76:4580–4590.
77. Zhang, C., N. Cortez, and K. I. Berns. 2007. Characterization of a bipartite
recombinant adeno-associated virus vector for site-specific integration. Hum.
Gene Ther. 18:787–797.
78. Zhang, Y. I., N. Chirmule, G. P. Gao, and J. M. Wilson. 2000. CD40
ligand-dependent activation of cytotoxic T lymphocytes by adeno-associated
virus vector in vivo: role of immature dendritic cells. J. Virol. 74:8003–8010.
79. Zhao, W., J. Wu, L. Zhong, and A. Srivastava. 2007. Adeno-associated virus
2-mediated gene transfer: role of a cellular serine/threonine protein phosphatase in augmenting transduction efficiency. Gene Ther. 14:545–550.
80. Zhong, L., W. Zhao, J. Wu, B. Li, S. Zolotukhin, L. Govindasamy, M.
Agbandje-McKenna, and A. Srivastava. 2007. A dual-role of EGFR protein
kinase signaling in ubiquitination of AAV 2 capsids and viral second strand
synthesis. Mol. Ther. 17:1323–1330.

