See discussions, stats, and author proﬁles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/233878763

-Synuclein-Induced Down-Regulation of Nurr1 Disrupts GDNF Signaling in
Nigral Dopamine Neurons
Article in Science translational medicine · December 2012
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3004676 · Source: PubMed

CITATIONS

READS

100

366

6 authors, including:
Decressac Mickael

Banafsheh Kadkhodaei

Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine

University of California, San Francisco

28 PUBLICATIONS 1,303 CITATIONS

14 PUBLICATIONS 499 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Bengt Mattsson

Ariadna Laguna

Lund University

VHIR Vall d’Hebron Research Institute

34 PUBLICATIONS 2,355 CITATIONS

14 PUBLICATIONS 490 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Decressac Mickael on 31 May 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded ﬁle.

SEE PROFILE

α-Synuclein−Induced Down-Regulation of Nurr1 Disrupts GDNF Signaling
in Nigral Dopamine Neurons
Mickael Decressac et al.
Sci Transl Med 4, 163ra156 (2012);
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3004676

Editor's Summary

Glial cell line−derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its close relative neurturin are currently in clinical trials for
neuroprotection in patients with Parkinson disease (PD). Although effective in classic neurotoxin animal models of this
disease, GDNF has failed to afford protection in PD rodent models in which dopamine neurons are killed by α
-synuclein toxicity. Using a rat model of α-synuclein−mediated PD, Decressac et al. now show that excess cellular
concentrations of α-synuclein effectively block the trophic response of dopamine neurons to GDNF. They provide
evidence that blockade of GDNF signaling is caused by reduced expression of the transcription factor Nurr1 and its
downstream target, the GDNF receptor Ret. Deletion of Nurr1 resulted in reduced Ret expression, accompanied by a
complete failure of dopamine neurons to respond to exogenously applied GDNF. However, when the investigators
induced expression of Nurr1, Ret receptor expression was restored as well as the response to GDNF in the dopamine
neurons subjected to α-synuclein toxicity. These results suggest that Nurr1 is a key player in the cellular defense
against α-synuclein toxicity and highlight Nurr1 as a promising new target for neuroprotective therapy.

A complete electronic version of this article and other services, including high-resolution figures,
can be found at:
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/4/163/163ra156.full.html
Supplementary Material can be found in the online version of this article at:
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2012/12/03/4.163.163ra156.DC1.html
Information about obtaining reprints of this article or about obtaining permission to reproduce this
article in whole or in part can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/permissions.dtl

Science Translational Medicine (print ISSN 1946-6234; online ISSN 1946-6242) is published weekly, except the
last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue
NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2012 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all
rights reserved. The title Science Translational Medicine is a registered trademark of AAAS.

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

NURRishing Dopamine Neurons with GDNF

RESEARCH ARTICLE
PARKINSON’S DISEASE

a-Synuclein–Induced Down-Regulation of Nurr1
Disrupts GDNF Signaling in Nigral Dopamine Neurons
Glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its close relative neurturin are currently in clinical trials for
neuroprotection in patients with Parkinson disease (PD). However, in animal models of PD, GDNF fails to protect
nigral dopamine (DA) neurons against a-synuclein–induced neurodegeneration. Using viral vector delivery of human wild-type a-synuclein to nigral DA neurons in rats, we show that the intracellular response to GDNF is blocked
in DA neurons that overexpress a-synuclein. This block is accompanied by reduced expression of the transcription
factor Nurr1 and its downstream target, the GDNF receptor Ret. We found that Ret expression was also reduced in
nigral DA neurons in PD patients. Conditional knockout of Nurr1 in mice resulted in reduced Ret expression and
blockade of the response to GDNF, whereas overexpression of Nurr1 restored signaling, providing protection of
nigral DA neurons against a-synuclein toxicity. These results suggest that Nurr1 is a regulator of neurotrophic factor
signaling and a key player in the cellular defense against a-synuclein toxicity.

INTRODUCTION
The pathogenic processes leading to the progressive loss of nigral dopamine (DA) neurons and aggregation of a-synuclein in Parkinson
disease (PD) are poorly understood. Current clinical interventions provide symptomatic relief, but none of the neuroprotective or neuroregenerative strategies successfully tested in preclinical models of PD
have so far provided therapeutic benefits in clinical trials (1). Glial cell
line–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and its close relative neurturin,
in particular, have been shown to provide substantial anatomical and
functional rescue of the nigrostriatal pathway in both rodent and primate
models of PD in which the nigrostriatal DA neurons were killed by the
toxins 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) or 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) (2–6). Despite promising preclinical data,
however, it remains unclear whether GDNF or neurturin can provide
neuroprotection or restorative efficacy in PD patients (7–11).
The development of disease-modifying drugs for PD is impeded by
the lack of animal models that faithfully mimic the human disease. The
standard toxin-based models of PD reproduce the canonical loss of
midbrain DA neurons but fail to replicate the progressive, timedependent nature of the degenerative process and the development of
a-synucleinopathy (12). Over the last decade, our insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of PD have increased. Mechanisms related to free
radical stress and mitochondrial damage play a role, but they constitute
only part of the intricate neuropathological cascade leading to neuronal
dysfunction and cell death. In particular, considerable progress has been
made on the involvement of a-synuclein in PD pathogenesis (13, 14).
Thus, increased cellular concentrations of native a-synuclein, or formation of toxic forms of the protein, have been shown to induce progressive
degenerative changes in the affected DA neurons. This is revealed at early stages as axonal damage and synaptic dysfunction and later is followed
by degeneration and loss of nigral DA neurons (15–17). Because of the
1
Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Experimental Medical Sciences,
Lund University, BMC A11, Lund 22184, Sweden. 2Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm S-171 77, Sweden. 3Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm S-171 77, Sweden.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: Anders.Bjorklund@med.lu.se
(A.B.); Mickael.Decressac@med.lu.se (M.D.)

broad impact of a-synuclein toxicity that extends beyond free radical
damage and mitochondrial dysfunction modeled in the 6-OHDA and
MPTP toxin models of PD, we and others have reexamined the neuroprotective effects of GDNF in the more recently introduced a-synuclein
overexpression models of PD. We have found that in these a-synuclein
overexpression models, GDNF indeed fails to protect nigral DA neurons
against a-synuclein–induced toxicity (18, 19).
The marked discrepancy in neuroprotective potency of GDNF in
neurotoxin and a-synuclein models of PD raises the possibility that increased cellular concentrations of a-synuclein may interfere with GDNF
signaling, rendering nigral DA neurons desensitized to its trophic effect. Here, we have used targeted delivery of an a-synuclein expressing
adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector to overexpress human wild-type
a-synuclein in nigral DA neurons in adult rats. We show that the intracellular signaling response induced by GDNF is almost completely
blocked in the a-synuclein–affected DA neurons. Markedly, this blockade was accompanied by reduced expression of the transcription factor Nurr1 and its downstream regulated targets, including the GDNF
receptor Ret. Down-regulation of Nurr1, induced by a-synuclein, affected not only the expression of components of the DA synthesis and
release machinery but also the ability of the nigral DA neurons to respond
to GDNF through regulation of Ret expression. We show that this blockade of the GDNF response is effectively reversed by overexpression of
Nurr1 in the affected cells and that increased expression of Nurr1 can
provide near-complete protection of nigral DA neurons against a-synuclein
toxicity, also in the absence of exogenously administered GDNF.

RESULTS
a-Synuclein impairs the response of rat nigral
DA neurons to GDNF
We used a recombinant AAV vector to overexpress human wild-type
a-synuclein in nigral DA neurons of rat brain. We injected 3 ml of the
vector unilaterally into the substantia nigra of adult rats. Control rats
received a similar injection of an AAV vector expressing a gene encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) instead of the gene encoding

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

1

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

Mickael Decressac,1* Banafsheh Kadkhodaei,2 Bengt Mattsson,1 Ariadna Laguna,2
Thomas Perlmann,2,3 Anders Björklund1*

human a-synuclein. a-Synuclein was expressed at a level sufficient to
induce progressive degeneration of DA neurons and time-dependent
DA neuron loss (16). First, we assessed the trophic response induced
by GDNF in midbrain DA neurons overexpressing either a-synuclein
or GFP. GDNF was given as a single 1-mg injection into the striatum
2 weeks after vector injection, that is, at a time when a-synuclein (and
GFP) was expressed but before any cell loss had occurred (16); animals
were sacrificed 2 days after GDNF injection. The induced trophic response was assessed by monitoring the expression of the phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 by immunohistochemistry. Phosphorylation
of ribosomal protein S6 is an indicator of the upstream activation of
the neuroprotective Akt/mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) pathway. In the AAV-GFP–injected control rats, injection of GDNF into
the striatum elicited a distinct trophic response specifically confined
to the nigral DA neurons, identified by their expression of tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH), an enzyme necessary for the production of DA. In
Fig. 1A and fig. S1, GDNF induced intense immunoreactivity of phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 selectively in the TH-positive DA
neurons on the side ipsilateral to the injection. Consistent with the
well-established neuroprotective effect of GDNF in the standard toxinbased models of PD, a similar response was observed in rats that received
an injection of 6-OHDA into the medial forebrain bundle (MFB) 2 days
before the striatal injection of GDNF (Fig. 1A and fig. S1). By contrast,
2 weeks after intranigral injection of AAV–a-synuclein, the transduced
DA neurons failed to elicit such activation (Fig. 1A and fig. S1). We
confirmed that the absence of phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6
staining did not result from loss of nigral DA neurons because 2 weeks
after AAV–a-synuclein injection, most nigral neurons expressed the transgene, but no significant neuronal or terminal loss was observed at this
time point [fig. S2; see also (16)].
Previous studies suggest that a-synucleinopathy may result in blockade of axonal transport (15, 20). To circumvent this possible defect,
we performed a similar experiment where GDNF (1 mg) was delivered
into the substantia nigra. Whereas nigral DA neurons overexpressing
GFP showed a clear response to GDNF, phosphorylated ribosomal
protein S6 immunoreactivity was markedly reduced in neurons overexpressing a-synuclein (bottom row in Fig. 1A).
To further investigate this lack of response, we analyzed the activation of several proteins involved in the GDNF signaling cascade including Ret, Akt, extracellular signal–regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2),
S6, and Bad by Western blot. Consistent with our histological observation, we found that GDNF triggered activation of these effectors in
intact, GFP-overexpressing, 6-OHDA–treated neurons, as seen by increased concentrations of phosphorylated Ret, Akt, ERK, S6, and Bad,
suggesting a prosurvival effect of the neurotrophic factor (Fig. 1, B and
C). By contrast, striatal injection of GDNF in a-synuclein–overexpressing
rats failed to activate the Akt and mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathways, although Ret was phosphorylated to the same magnitude as in the other conditions, suggesting a blockade of the pathway downstream of the receptor (Fig. 1C). Recent studies suggest that
GDNF induces the expression of the transcription factors Nurr1 and Pitx3
(21, 22). Here, using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) analysis, we show that intrastriatal injection of GDNF induced
increases in the concentrations of both Nurr1 (2.3 ± 0.3–fold increase)
and Pitx3 (2.4 ± 0.3–fold increase) mRNAs, as well as those of their
transcriptional targets TH (2.0 ± 0.2–fold), vesicular monoamine
transporter 2 (VMAT-2) (1.8 ± 0.2–fold), DA transporter (DAT)
(1.7 ± 0.1–fold), aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) (1.4 ±

0.1–fold), and Ret (1.9 ± 0.2–fold) relative to the intact side (all P <
0.05) (open bar in Fig. 1D). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
mRNA was also increased (1.8 ± 0.2–fold), whereas expression of GFRa1
(GDNF family receptor a1), NeuN, and Girk-2 transcripts remained
unchanged (P > 0.05). By contrast, GDNF failed to trigger changes in
expression of these targets in a-synuclein–overexpressing animals (all
P < 0.05 compared to the GFP group) (black bar in Fig. 1D). The expression of the genes is reduced below that seen on the control side,
which is due to the effect of a-synuclein overexpression (see below).
Similarly, histological analysis revealed that induction of phosphorylated
CREB (adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate response element–binding
protein), a transcription factor involved in Nurr1-mediated neuroprotection (23), was absent 2 days after intrastriatal injection of GDNF in
AAV–a-synuclein–injected animals compared to the GFP group (Fig. 1E).
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) measurements revealed that the expression of endogenous GDNF was significantly elevated in the substantia nigra (183 ± 18%) and striatum (161 ± 15%)
(all P < 0.01) at 2 weeks after AAV–a-synuclein injection compared to
the GFP group (Fig. 1F). Therefore, we looked at whether endogenous
GDNF was able to trigger any related intracellular pathways in the
nigral DA neurons. We found that Ret was not activated (119 ± 14%),
and the concentrations of phosphorylated Akt (p-Akt; 61 ± 6%) and
phosphorylated S6 (p-S6; 33 ± 9%) were significantly reduced (P < 0.01)
in a-synuclein–transduced animals not challenged with exogenous GDNF.
This suggested that the a-synuclein–overexpressing nigral neurons were
not able to respond to either exogenous or endogenous GDNF (Fig. 1G).
To ascertain that the lack of response to GDNF was not due to a
misleading observation at a single time point (48 hours after GDNF
injection in Fig. 1), we performed a time-course study and examined the
activation of the same markers, as above, after 6, 24, and 72 hours. The
same defect in the response to GDNF was apparent in the a-synuclein–
overexpressing nigral neurons at all time points, as assessed by histological and Western blot analyses (Fig. 2, A and B). The immunostaining
against human GDNF showed that the injection of the recombinant
peptide (1 mg) covered the entire striatal region (fig. S1). Thus, we speculated that the activation of nigral DA neurons might be dose-dependent.
Therefore, we performed an additional experiment where GDNF was
delivered at a 10-fold higher dose (10 mg). Likewise, at this very high
dose, the response of a-synuclein–transduced neurons to GDNF was
almost completely blocked compared to control AAV-GFP and 6-OHDA–
injected rats (Fig. 2, C and D).
Finally, we measured the expression of human GDNF by ELISA in
the rat midbrain 48 hours after injection (10 mg) and found that the
amount of protein transported back to the substantia nigra was significantly reduced in the a-synuclein–transduced animals (1.0 ± 0.3 pg/mg)
compared to the AAV-GFP group (3.6 ± 0.6 pg/mg) (P < 0.01) (Fig. 2E).
Histological analysis further confirmed this finding, as abundant punctate
GDNF staining was observed in the soma of nigral neurons overexpressing GFP 6 hours after injection of GDNF into the striatum, whereas
very few cells contained human GDNF in the AAV–a-synuclein group
(Fig. 2F).
GDNF signaling cascade is impaired in nigral DA neurons
overexpressing a-synuclein
Next, we performed qPCR analysis to assess the impact of a-synuclein
on components of the GDNF signaling cascade and the DA synthesis
and release machinery. Overexpression of human a-synuclein induced
down-regulation of genes involved in DA neurotransmission, including

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

2

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 1. a-Synuclein suppresses
the response to GDNF. (A) Immunostaining of phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 in
the midbrain of rats 2 days
after unilateral (right side) intrastriatal or intranigral injection
of human recombinant GDNF
(1 mg/3 ml). Control (top left), 6OHDA–injected (top right), GFPoverexpressing (middle and
bottom left), or a-synuclein (asyn)–overexpressing (middle
and bottom right) midbrain
neurons. Scale bar, 600 mm.
SN, injection in the substantia
nigra; Str, injection in the striatum. (B and C) Western blot of
Ret, ERK1/2, Akt, S6, and Bad activation in control, 6-OHDA–
treated, GFP-overexpressing,
or a-synuclein–overexpressing
rat midbrain 48 hours after intrastriatal injection of GDNF.
Data are expressed as means ±
SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05
compared to the AAV-GFP group
(Student’s t test). (D) qPCR analysis showing mRNA expression
of human a-synuclein, Nurr1,
Pitx3, TH, VMAT-2, DAT, AADC,
Ret, GFRa1, BDNF, NeuN, and
Girk-2 in rat midbrain overexpressing GFP or a-synuclein
2 days after intrastriatal injection of GDNF. *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group
(Student’s t test). (E) Double
immunofluorescence staining
showing the activation of phosphorylated CREB in nigral
neurons stimulated 48 hours
previously by intrastriatal injection of GDNF. By contrast,
a-synuclein–overexpressing
neurons failed to elicit a similar response on challenge with
GDNF. Scale bar, 50 mm. (F)
ELISA measurements of endogenous rat GDNF concentrations
from midbrain and striatal tissue 2 weeks after intranigral
delivery of AAV-GFP or AAV–a-synuclein vectors. Data are expressed as
means ± SEM (n = 4 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group
(Student’s t test). SN, substantia nigra; Str, striatum. (G) Western blot analysis
revealed that the a-synuclein–induced increase of endogenous GDNF is unable to trigger a response from nigral DA neurons, as seen by the unchanged
concentration of phosphorylated Ret and the reduced expression of p-S6
and p-Akt in the AAV–a-synuclein group compared to the AAV-GFP control
group. Data are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test).

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

3

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 2. Impairment of the response to GDNF is not time- or dose-dependent.
(A) Immunostaining of p-S6 in the midbrain of rats overexpressing GFP as
control or a-synuclein 6, 24, and 72 hours after unilateral (right side) intrastriatal injection of human GDNF (1 mg/3 ml). Scale bar, 800 mm. (B) Phosphorylated Ret, Akt, and S6 proteins in the midbrain were quantified from
Western blot experiments. The plots represent mean values (n = 5 per group
at each time point). *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t
test). (C) Immunostaining of p-S6 in the midbrain of rats overexpressing
GFP as control or a-synuclein 48 hours after intrastriatal injection (right side)
of a higher dose of human GDNF (10 mg/3 ml). Scale bar, 800 mm. (D) Quantification of Western blots of phosphorylated Ret, Akt, and S6 in control,
6-OHDA–injected, GFP-overexpressing, or a-synuclein–overexpressing rats

48 hours after intrastriatal injection of a high dose of GDNF (10 mg). Data
are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to
the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (E) Human GDNF measured by ELISA
in striatal and midbrain tissues from rats overexpressing GFP or a-synuclein
6 hours after intrastriatal injection of 10 mg of human GDNF. Data are expressed as percentage of GFP control group and presented as means ± SEM
(n = 4 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t
test). (F) Double immunofluorescence staining showing the retrograde
transport of human GDNF 6 hours after intrastriatal injection in control
rats overexpressing GFP (top). Reduced GDNF immunoreactivity (red) is
observed in the TH-positive nigral neurons (green) of rats overexpressing
a-synuclein (bottom). Scale bar, 20 mm.

the dopaminergic markers TH (43 ± 9%), VMAT-2 (40 ± 12%), DAT
(58 ± 11%), and AADC (36 ± 11%) and the transcription factors Nurr1
(35 ± 10%), Pitx3 (48 ± 8%), and MEF2D (63 ± 8%; all P < 0.01) (Fig.
3A). Notably, we found a marked reduction in the expression of the
GDNF receptor Ret (33 ± 6%; P < 0.001), whereas the expression of
GFRa1 was unaltered (96 ± 8%) (Fig. 3A). A significant reduction in
the expression of endogenous rat a-synuclein (55 ± 12% of control),

BDNF (65 ± 7%), and the PD-related gene DJ-1 (64 ± 9%) was observed (all P < 0.01) (Fig. 3A). We also examined the expression of
microRNAs (miRs) and found reduced expression of miR-21 (64 ± 10%)
and miR-22 (47 ± 9%), regulators of phosphatase and tensin homolog
(PTEN) (24, 25), as well as of miR-133b (55 ± 11%), regulator of Pitx3
(26) (all P < 0.01) (Fig. 3A). By contrast, concentrations of miR-7 (170 ±
15%) and miR-153 (180 ± 19%), regulators of a-synuclein (27, 28), were

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

4

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 3. a-Synuclein overexpression represses DA synthesis and release. (A)
qPCR analysis of human and rat a-synuclein, Nurr1, Pitx3, TH, VMAT-2, DAT,
AADC, Ret, GFRa1, MEF2D, DJ-1, BDNF, Girk-2, and NeuN mRNAs, and
miR-21, -22, -7, -153, -133b, and -124, in the rat midbrain 2 weeks after
injection of AAV-GFP or AAV–a-synuclein vectors. Data are expressed as
means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group
(Student’s t test). (B) In situ hybridization of TH, Nurr1, Pitx3, DAT, and Ret
mRNAs in rat midbrain sections 2 weeks after intranigral injection of
AAV–a-synuclein vector (right side). Scale bar, 1 mm. (C and D) Concentra-

tions of Nurr1, Pitx3, TH, VMAT-2, DAT, PTEN, Ret, and GFRa1 in midbrain
from GFP or a-synuclein–overexpressing animals were analyzed by Western blot. Data are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 5 per group) *P < 0.05
compared to the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (E) Immunofluorescence
images illustrating the reduced expression of TH, VMAT-2, Ret, Nurr1, p-S6,
and MEF2D in nigral DA neurons overexpressing human a-synuclein (bottom row) compared to the noninjected control side (top row); expression
of GFRa1 and NeuN were unaffected. Scale bar, 60 mm for a-synuclein, TH,
Ret, Nurr1, and p-S6 and 30 mm for VMAT-2, GFRa1, and MEF2D.

significantly increased, which is consistent with the reduced expression
of their target (all P > 0.001) (Fig. 3A). No changes in the expression
of NeuN (108 ± 10%), Girk-2 (109 ± 12%), and miR-124 (102 ± 4%)
were observed in the AAV–a-synuclein group compared to the AAVGFP groups (Fig. 3A). Reduction in mRNA concentrations of Nurr1,
Pitx3, TH, DAT, and Ret was confirmed by in situ hybridization 2
weeks after AAV–a-synuclein injection (Fig. 3B) and was also observed at the protein level, as assessed by Western blot analysis (Fig.
3, C and D) and immunohistochemistry (Fig. 3E).
As previously reported (29), examination of human postmortem
midbrain sections from six PD patients revealed that TH immunoreactivity

was markedly reduced in nigral DA neurons containing a-synuclein–
positive inclusions compared to DA neurons without Lewy bodies or
neurons from control specimens (Fig. 4, top panel). This supports the
idea that this down-regulation might be a pathological event characteristic of PD and not just a restricted observation in our animal model. We also found that Ret immunoreactivity was reduced in nigral DA
neurons from PD brains compared to age-matched healthy controls
(Fig. 4, bottom panel).
Sections stained for a-synuclein phosphorylated on serine 129
(Ser129) showed prominent nuclear localization of a-synuclein in many
DA neurons (fig. S3A). Previous studies have suggested that nuclear

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

5

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 4. Down-regulation of
TH and Ret in human PD brain.
(Top) Immunofluorescence staining of human control and PD
postmortem midbrain tissue
showing the reduced expression
of TH (red) in nigral neurons containing a-synuclein–positive inclusions (green). Nigral neurons
were identified by the presence
of neuromelanin using light microscopy (pseudocolor, blue).
(Bottom) Immunostaining of
Ret (gray/blue) in three human
control and six PD midbrain
sections illustrating the reduced
expression of the GDNF receptor Ret in nigral DA neurons
identified by neuromelanin pigment (brown). Scale bar, 20 mm.

translocation of a-synuclein, which is facilitated by phosphorylation at
Ser129, may be detrimental for DA neurons and may have an impact
on the transcriptional machinery (30–34). Marked reduction in the concentration of the dopaminergic marker VMAT-2 and the survival-related
transcription factor MEF2D (35) was specifically observed in nigral neurons with strong immunoreactivity for phosphorylated a-synuclein in
the nucleus (fig. S3, A and B). Co-immunoprecipitation experiments
revealed that a-synuclein interacts with histone H3 in the nucleus (fig. S3D)
and reduces its acetylation in a-synuclein–overexpressing animals (fig.
S3C), suggesting a negative effect on transcriptional activity. Consistent
with a previous study performed in a-synuclein transgenic mice (36), we
found that the expression of the histone acetyltransferase p300 was
lower in rats overexpressing a-synuclein compared to controls (fig.

S3E). In addition, expression of sirtuin-2, a histone deacetylase known
to be abundant in the aging brain and whose inhibition was shown to
protect against a-synuclein–induced toxicity (37, 38), was higher in the
AAV–a-synuclein–transduced midbrain compared to that of control
rats (fig. S3E). Given that sirtuin-2 is known to deacetylate tubulin, it
may affect axonal transport. Western blot analysis showed reduced concentrations of acetyl-a-tubulin, which is in line with the defect of GDNF
transport described above (fig. S3E).
Nurr1 is a key
regulator of the GDNF signaling cascade
The prominent a-synuclein–induced down-regulation of Nurr1 and its
target, the GDNF receptor Ret, suggested a potential role for Nurr1 in

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

6

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 5. Nurr1 is crucial for the maintenance of DA markers and Ret expression. (A) Immunostaining for
human GDNF showing distribution of the protein 24 hours after unilateral injection of 1 mg of human recombinant GDNF into the mouse striatum (right side). Scale bar, 1.5 mm. (B) Immunostaining for p-S6 in
control Nurr1WT/WT (top) and Nurr1cKO/cKO mice (bottom) 24 hours after unilateral intrastriatal injection of
GDNF (1 mg/1 ml) (right side). Scale bar, 800 mm. (C and D) Western blot of phosphorylated Ret, Akt, and
S6 in Nurr1WT/WT and Nurr1cKO/cKO mice 24 hours after intrastriatal injection of GDNF (1 mg/1 ml) showing the
response of nigral DA neurons in transgenic mice compared to controls. Data are expressed as means ± SEM
(n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the Nurr1+/+ group (Student’s t test). (E) In situ hybridization of TH,
AADC, Ret, GFRa1, and a-synuclein in midbrain sections 8 weeks after tamoxifen treatment of control and
Nurr1 floxed mice. Scale bar, 200 mm. (F) qPCR analysis of Nurr1, Pitx3, TH, VMAT-2, DAT, AADC, Ret, and
GFRa1 mRNAs in Nurr1-ablated and control mice 8 to 10 weeks after tamoxifen treatment. Data are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the Nurr1WT/WT group (Student’s t test).
(G) Western blot analysis of Nurr1, TH, DAT, Ret, and GFRa1 in midbrain tissue from Nurr1WT/WT and
Nurr1cKO/cKO mice 8 to 10 weeks after tamoxifen treatment. *P < 0.05 (Student’s t test).

the regulation of the cell’s responsiveness to GDNF. To investigate this
further, we used a strain of gene-targeted (floxed) mice in which Nurr1
can be conditionally ablated in adult DA neurons by treatment with tamoxifen (Nurr1 conditional knockout mice) to determine the importance of this transcription factor in the maintenance of the GDNF

signaling pathway. Homozygous floxed
mice (1.5 months old) and control littermates were treated with tamoxifen, received an intrastriatal injection of GDNF
(1 mg) 8 to 10 weeks later, and were sacrificed after 24 hours (Fig. 5A). Histological
analysis showed that GDNF injection triggered phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 in nigral DA neurons on the injected
side in control animals, whereas immunoreactivity for phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 was similar on the two sides
in the transgenic mice with conditional
knockout of Nurr1 (Fig. 5B). Western blot
analysis revealed that Ret activation in the
striatum was similar in the control and Nurr1
conditional knockout mice (222 ± 18%
increase in control mice and 194 ± 19%
increase in Nurr1 conditional knockout
mice, P = 0.68), whereas downstream activation of Akt and S6 was significantly
impaired in the Nurr1 conditional knockout mice (156 ± 29% increase for p-Akt
and 142 ± 18% increase for p-S6) compared to control littermates (323 ± 41%
for p-Akt and 289 ± 29% for p-S6) (all
P < 0.01) (Fig. 5, C and D).
We then examined how deletion of
Nurr1 affected the expression of dopaminergic markers and GDNF receptors.
Eight weeks after tamoxifen treatment,
Nurr1 conditional knockout mice exhibited reduced expression of TH (47 ± 9%),
VMAT-2 (51 ± 7%), DAT (35 ± 6%),
AADC (53 ± 7), and Ret mRNAs (32 ±
7%) (all P < 0.05), whereas GFRa1 (92 ±
7%) and Pitx3 (98 ± 10%) concentrations
were not altered compared to wild-type
littermates (P > 0.05; Fig. 5F). These observations were further confirmed by in
situ hybridization (Fig. 5E) and Western
blot analysis (Fig. 5G). Together, our data
show similar down-regulation of dopaminergic markers and disruption of GDNF
signaling as a result of a-synuclein overexpression or Nurr1 ablation.

Nurr1 overexpression restores
the response to GDNF
Next, we asked whether enhanced expression of Nurr1 (using AAV vector delivery)
in a-synuclein–overexpressing neurons
could restore their ability to respond to
GDNF. First, we rescued the expression of this transcription factor in
Nurr1 conditional knockout mice (Fig. 6A) and observed that it restored
the responsiveness of nigral DA neurons to GDNF. This was seen as
increased phosphorylated ribosomal protein S6 immunoreactivity induced by GDNF delivery to the striatum; mice receiving AAV-GFP

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

7

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 6. Nurr1 overexpression restores DA marker expression and response to
GDNF. (A) Schematic representation of the experimental timeline performed
in the conditional knockout (cKO) Nurr1 mice. Tam, tamoxifen treatment. (B)
p-S6 staining of midbrain section from Nurr1-ablated mice overexpressing GFP
or Nurr1 2 days after unilateral intrastriatal injection of GDNF (1 mg) (right side).
Scale bar, 800 mm. (C) qPCR analysis of Nurr1, Pitx3, TH, VMAT-2, Ret, and
GFRa1 mRNAs in Nurr1cKO/cKO mice after AAV-mediated overexpression of
GFP or Nurr1. Data are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P <
0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (D and E) Immunofluorescence images illustrating the AAV-mediated overexpression of GFP
(D) or Nurr1 (E) (green) in nigral DA neurons (TH in red) when vectors were
mixed with the AAV–a-synuclein vector. Scale bar, 150 mm. (F to I) p-S6 immunoreactivity in midbrain DA neurons overexpressing a-synuclein + GFP (F and H)
or a-synuclein + Nurr1 (G and I) after injection of GDNF (H and I) or vehicle

(F to G) into the striatum 2 days earlier (right side). Scale bar, 500 mm. (J)
Quantification of Western blot analysis showing activation of Ret, Akt, S6,
ERK1/2, and Bad in midbrain tissue after overexpression of a-synuclein + Nurr1,
with or without stimulation by intrastriatal GDNF. Data are expressed as
means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05, Student’s t test. (K) qPCR analysis of
human and rat a-synuclein, Nurr1, Pitx3, TH, VMAT-2, DAT, AADC, Ret, and
GFRa1 mRNA concentrations in rat midbrain 2 weeks after AAV vector–
mediated overexpression of a-synuclein + GFP or a-synuclein + Nurr1. Data
are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the
AAV–a-synuclein + AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (L) Double immunofluorescence staining of human GDNF (red) and TH (green) showing that Nurr1
overexpression was efficient in restoring retrograde transport of the neurotrophic factor in nigral DA neurons affected by a-synuclein. GDNF (10 mg/3 ml)
was injected 2 days earlier into the striatum. Scale bar, 20 mm.

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

8

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Nurr1 protects against a-synuclein–induced toxicity
To investigate the protective role of Nurr1 in the context of PD pathology, we studied whether modulation of Nurr1 expression affects
survival of a-synuclein–overexpressing nigral DA neurons. We first
evaluated the impact of Nurr1 ablation on a-synuclein–induced DA
neurodegeneration (see experimental design in Fig. 7A). To do so, we
injected AAV–a-synuclein vector at a concentration that induces
marginal damage in wild-type Nurr1WT/WT mice (91 ± 4% of control
side) (Fig. 7, C and D). In tamoxifen-treated Nurr1 conditional knockout mice, the amphetamine-induced rotation test revealed a significantly higher number of turns in homozygous Nurr1cKO/cKO mice
(6.4 ± 1.1 turns) compared to either wild-type (0.6 ± 0.5 turns) or
heterozygous animals (2.0 ± 0.7 turns) [(F2,42 = 6.56; P < 0.01); twoway analysis of variance (ANOVA) vector × genotype interaction]
(Fig. 7B). Consistent with the behavioral data, stereological counts
showed that a-synuclein caused significant loss of DA neurons in heterozygous Nurr1WT/cKO mice (74 ± 6% of control side) and an even
more profound degeneration in homozygous Nurr1cKO/cKO mice (44 ±
7% of control side) [(F2,42 = 11.06; P < 0.001); two-way ANOVA vector ×
genotype interaction] (Fig. 7, C and D).
We then examined whether Nurr1 overexpression can prevent dopaminergic cell loss caused by a-synuclein toxicity. Rats received intranigral injection of AAV–a-synuclein together with AAV-Nurr1 or
AAV-GFP and were examined 8 weeks later (16, 39). We found that
Nurr1 overexpression prevented the development of motor impairment (1.2 ± 0.9 turns/min) compared to the GFP control group (5.6 ±
0.7 turns/min) (P < 0.05) (Fig. 7E). Stereological analysis showed that
AAV-mediated Nurr1 expression afforded robust protection of VMAT2–positive nigral neurons (81 ± 9% of control side) compared to the
GFP control group (35 ± 7% of control side) (P < 0.01) (Fig. 7, F and
G), as well as near-complete protection of the striatal TH-positive innervation on the injected side (Fig. 7, H and I). Notably, this was
accompanied by a marked activation of phosphorylated ribosomal

protein S6 and retained Ret expression in the rescued nigral DA neurons in the Nurr1-treated rats (Fig. 7, I and J).
Insulin-like growth factor 1 signaling is not affected
in the AAV–a-synuclein model
The marked effect of a-synuclein overexpression on GDNF signaling
raises the question on whether the alterations described above are selective for signaling triggered by GDNF through the Ret receptor or
whether other trophic factors acting through a receptor with tyrosine
kinase activity are equally affected. We selected insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) for comparison because, like GDNF, it has previously
been shown to exert neuroprotection in the rat 6-OHDA lesion model
and because the A9 nigral neurons express high concentrations of
IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) (40, 41). qPCR analysis showed that expression of IGF-1R was not altered by a-synuclein overexpression (fig.
S4A), despite the increased expression of miR-7, reported above
(Fig. 3A), which has been described as a negative regulator of this receptor in other cells (42). Delivery of IGF-1 into the striatum triggered
an intracellular response in nigral DA neurons, as assessed by the expression of p-S6 (fig. S4B). Markedly, this response was unaffected in
a-synuclein–overexpressing neurons (fig. S4B). Western blot analysis
confirmed that the Akt, ERK1/2, and S6 pathways were equally stimulated by IGF-1 in all experimental groups (fig. S4C). Maintenance of
IGF-1 signaling in the absence of Nurr1 was confirmed in tamoxifentreated Nurr1 conditional knockout mice. In these mice, IGF-1R expression was unchanged, and midbrain DA neurons were stimulated
by IGF-1 with the same efficiency as in control wild-type animals (fig.
S4, D and E). This may possibly explain why the IGF-1 signaling system in DA neurons escapes from the repressive effects of a-synuclein.

DISCUSSION
GDNF and related neurotrophic factors have profound protective
effects on DA neurons in toxin animal models of PD. However, clinical trials using exogenous GDNF have provided inconclusive results.
The data presented in this study provide a mechanistic explanation for
these apparently conflicting results and suggest the intriguing possibility that a-synuclein toxicity acting at the level of gene expression leads
to the disruption of neurotrophic signaling. The results show that increased cellular concentrations of a-synuclein block the intracellular
signaling response to GDNF, thus affecting the ability of the nigral DA
neurons to respond to both exogenous and endogenous GDNF, and
that Nurr1 may mediate this effect. Consistent with previous findings in
PD patients (29), the expression of Nurr1 was reduced by as much as 70
to 80% in the a-synuclein–overexpressing DA neurons of rat brain. As a
consequence, expression of several Nurr1 target genes involved in the
regulation of DA neurotransmission, such as TH, DAT, and VMAT-2,
was substantially reduced. This was also the case for the expression of the
GDNF receptor Ret, which suggests that the blockade of the GDNF
trophic response is due to reduced availability of the receptor on the
affected cells. In support of this idea, we observed that Ret is down-regulated
in nigral neurons in PD patients, whereas the response to another trophic
factor, IGF-1, which acts through a different receptor independent of
Nurr1 regulation, was unaltered in rats overexpressing a-synuclein.
Recent studies have shown that the NR4A family of transcription
factors, of which Nurr1 (NR4A2) is a member, has a broad impact on

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

9

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

failed to show any such activation (Fig. 6B). This functional effect was
accompanied by the normalization of the expression of all dopaminergic markers and Ret expression (Fig. 6C).
We then explored the same strategy in rats overexpressing asynuclein and found that AAV-mediated expression of Nurr1 was
sufficient to partially restore the trophic response to GDNF in nigral
DA neurons, as assessed histologically by staining for phosphorylated ribosomal S6 protein (Fig. 6, D to I). Notably, Western blot
analysis revealed that activation of the intracellular signaling pathways was restored not only in Nurr1-overexpressing rats that had received an additional injection of GDNF but also in rats that did not
receive any exogenous GDNF (Fig. 6J). This suggests that nigral DA
neurons overexpressing Nurr1 were capable of responding not only to
exogenous GDNF but also to the increased concentrations of endogenous GDNF induced in response to a-synuclein overexpression (Fig. 1F).
qPCR data revealed that the expression of all dopaminergic markers and Ret were significantly greater, or even fully restored, in Nurr1overexpressing rats (all P < 0.05 compared to the AAV–a-synuclein
group) (Fig. 6K). Finally, we found that forced Nurr1 expression in
a-synuclein–transduced nigral neurons was able to restore GDNF retrograde transport compared to the GFP-treated control mice, where
GDNF immunoreactivity in DA neurons was very low 6 hours after
striatal delivery of GDNF (Fig. 6L).

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Fig. 7. Nurr1 protects nigral DA neurons against a-synuclein toxicity. (A)
Schematic representation of the experimental timeline. (B) a-Synuclein toxicity studied in Nurr1 conditional knockout mice with one or both Nurr1
genes deleted. Motor impairment was assessed using amphetamine-induced
rotation. Data are expressed as means ± SEM (n = 8 per group). *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (C) Quantification of THpositive nigral DA neurons 6 weeks after injection of AAV–a-synuclein or
AAV-GFP in Nurr1WT/WT, Nurr1WT/cKO, and Nurr1cKO/cKO mice. *P < 0.05; twoway ANOVA (vector × genotype interaction) followed by Bonferroni post
hoc test. (D) Immunostaining of TH-positive neurons in the substantia nigra
6 weeks after nigral delivery of AAV-GFP or AAV–a-synuclein vector in
Nurr1WT/WT, Nurr1WT/cKO, and Nurr1cKO/cKO mice. Scale bar, 600 mm. (E to I)
Protection against a-synuclein–mediated toxicity in rats treated with
AAV–a-synuclein. (E) Quantification of amphetamine-induced rotation
8 weeks after intranigral injection of AAV–a-synuclein + AAV-Nurr1 or

AAV–a-synuclein + AAV-GFP. *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV–a-synuclein +
AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (F) Stereological estimation of the number of VMAT-2–positive nigral neurons 8 weeks after intranigral injection
of a-synuclein + Nurr1 or a-synuclein + GFP. *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV–asynuclein + AAV-GFP group (Student’s t test). (G) VMAT-2–immunostained
midbrain sections from rats overexpressing a-synuclein + Nurr1 or a-synuclein +
GFP (right side). Scale bar, 600 mm. (H) Density of the striatal TH-positive
innervation in rats 8 weeks after intranigral injection of a-synuclein + Nurr1
or a-synuclein + GFP. *P < 0.05 compared to the AAV–a-synuclein + AAVGFP group (Student’s t test). (I) TH-immunostained forebrain sections from
rats overexpressing a-synuclein + Nurr1 or a-synuclein + GFP (right side).
Scale bar, 1.2 mm. (J and K) Immunostaining of phosphorylated S6 (J) and
Ret (K) 2 days after intrastriatal injection of GDNF (1 mg/1 ml; right), showing
restoration of the GDNF-induced trophic response in rats overexpressing
Nurr1. Scale bar, 800 mm.

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

10

cell survival. NR4A-deficient neurons are generally more sensitive to
neurodegeneration, induced, for example, by excitotoxic or oxidative
stress, which is likely to result from down-regulation of an NR4Adependent neuroprotective gene program (23, 43). Nurr1 is an important factor in the development and maintenance of midbrain DA
neurons (44–46). Our new data, as well as the results from a previous
study in MPTP-lesioned mice (47), show that Nurr1-deficient adult
mouse DA neurons are more sensitive to both a-synuclein and MPTPinduced toxicity. Conversely, we show that overexpression of Nurr1
can provide protection against the a-synuclein–induced toxic insult
in nigral DA neurons.
These observations support the idea that Nurr1 acts as a key factor
in the maintenance of DA neurons, not only as a regulator of trophic
signaling but probably also as a mediator of multiple signaling pathways that are involved in the control of both survival and function of
midbrain DA neurons. It has been shown that Nurr1 is activated in
response to excitotoxic and oxidative stress and that this effect is mediated by CREB (23, 43). This suggests that Nurr1 is a mediator of
CREB-dependent neuroprotective responses that are activated by
pathological stimuli or cellular stress. Moreover, as CREB is an effector
in the two principal neuroprotective pathways, phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt and MAPK (48), this points to a role of Nurr1 downstream of neurotrophic factor signaling. In support of this idea, we
show that Nurr1 expression in nigral DA neurons is increased 2.3-fold
in response to exogenously administered GDNF and that this is accompanied by two- to threefold increases in the concentrations of
p-Akt, ERK1/2, and S6, as well as induction of phosphorylated CREB.
This observation is in line with a recent study reporting transcriptional
activation in nigral DA neurons on striatal injection of GDNF (22).
Markedly, these downstream changes induced by injection of GDNF
were all blocked in a-synuclein–overexpressing DA neurons. In AAV–asynuclein–injected rats not treated with GDNF, the endogenous
GDNF concentration in the substantia nigra, as measured by ELISA,
was increased by 60 to 80% compared to the contralateral intact side.
Nevertheless, Ret was not activated and p-Akt and p-S6 concentrations were reduced below normal. This suggests that the blockade induced by increased cellular a-synuclein affected not only the response
to exogenous GDNF but also endogenous GDNF signaling.
The profound effect of a-synuclein on the expression of Nurr1 and
other transcription factors involved in regulation of cell survival, such
as Pitx3 and MEF2D, seen in the a-synuclein–overexpressing DA
neurons, suggests that the toxic effects of a-synuclein, at least in part,
may be induced at the level of gene transcription. a-Synuclein is located not only in the cytoplasm but also in the nucleus (30, 32–34, 49),
and a previous study in Drosophila (31) has shown that a-synuclein
targeted to the nucleus promotes toxicity, whereas cytoplasmic sequestration is protective. Here, they also showed that a-synuclein binds
directly to histones, thus inhibiting acetylation in histone acetyltransferase assays and that the toxicity of a-synuclein could be rescued by
administration of histone deacetylase inhibitors in both cell culture
and transgenic flies. Consistent with these observations, we found that
human a-synuclein expressed by the AAV vector interacts with histone
H3 in the nucleus and that the expression of histone acetyltransferase
p300 was reduced in the AAV–a-synuclein–treated animals, compared
to the intact or GFP-transduced controls. By confocal microscopy, we
could show that DA neurons with accumulation of phosphorylated
a-synuclein in the nucleus had markedly reduced concentrations of two
selected factors, the DA phenotypic marker VMAT-2 and the survival-

related transcription factor MEF2D. Together, these data support the
view that elevated concentrations of a-synuclein have profound effects
on gene expression caused by a-synuclein entering the nucleus and that
the impact on transcriptional activity, including expression of Nurr1,
may be mediated by interactions with histones leading to inhibition
of histone acetylation as previously suggested from studies in vitro (50).
The central role of Nurr1 as a regulator of the GDNF-induced trophic response is further supported by the observations made in Nurr1
conditional knockout mice. The expression of genes involved in DA
neurotransmission (TH, AADC, DAT, and VMAT-2) was reduced by
50 to 70% in the Nurr1 conditional knockout mice. The expression of
the Ret receptor was reduced to a similar extent (−68% in the Nurr1
conditional knockout mice compared to wild-type mice) as found in
a-synuclein–overexpressing rats (−74% compared to the intact side).
The response to GDNF stimulation, as measured by the increase in
p-Akt and S6, was impaired. We show that enhanced expression of
Nurr1 using AAV vector delivery reversed these gene expression changes
and restored the trophic response to GDNF, not only in Nurr1 conditional knockout mice but also in DA neurons in the AAV–a-synuclein–
overexpressing rats, showing that Nurr1 is both necessary and sufficient
for maintenance of GDNF signaling in DA neurons affected by increased cellular concentrations of a-synuclein.
In this analysis, we made two additional observations. First, retrograde transport of GDNF from striatum to nigra was markedly reduced (by about 75%) in the a-synuclein–overexpressing rat DA neurons,
and this defect was reversed by Nurr1. Second, enhanced expression of
Nurr1, in the absence of any exogenous GDNF, was able to induce a
GDNF-like trophic response, seen as an activation of both the Ret receptor
and its downstream signaling pathways (p-Akt, phosphorylated ERK, and
p-S6). Consistent with these observations, we show that enhanced expression of Nurr1 is sufficient to protect the nigral DA neurons—both the cell
bodies and the axonal projections in the striatum—against a-synuclein–
induced toxicity. This suggests that Nurr1 can act on its own to activate
the cell’s neuroprotective machinery in a way that mimics the response
induced by GDNF. This intriguing similarity suggests the possibility that
Nurr1 may act by restoring the ability of the a-synuclein–affected neurons to access and respond to endogenous GDNF.
Similar to its mode of action in the peripheral nervous system, it
has been proposed that GDNF can function as a retrograde trophic factor
also in midbrain DA neurons, internalized by the terminals in the striatum with help from the Ret receptor, and transported to the cell bodies
where it exerts its protective effects (51). Indeed, Bartus et al. (7) have
suggested that the modest clinical response seen in PD patients who
received AAV-neurturin injections in the striatum may be explained
by impaired retrograde transport of the trophic factor back to the cell
bodies in the substantia nigra. In AAV–a-synuclein–overexpressing
rats, however, the GDNF response was equally impaired when GDNF
was delivered into the striatum or into the substantia nigra. This suggests that a-synuclein–induced down-regulation of the Ret receptor
is the primary defect and that reduced transport is the result of reduced availability of the Ret receptor at the axon terminals. Given that
deletion of GDNF or Ret does not cause any acute DA neuron cell loss
in adult mice (52–54), it is unlikely that limited access to GDNF, or
reduced Ret signaling, is sufficient on its own to cause the pronounced
neurodegenerative changes seen in a-synuclein–overexpressing neurons.
In the AAV–a-synuclein–overexpressing rats, however, the endogenous concentration of GDNF was increased above normal, which makes
it possible that the GDNF-like trophic response induced by Nurr1 is

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

11

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

RESEARCH ARTICLE

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Vector production
Production of the AAV–a-synuclein, AAV-GFP, and AAV-Nurr1 vectors was performed as detailed in the Supplementary Materials.
Animals
Adult female Sprague-Dawley rats (Charles River), 225 to 250 g at the
time of surgery, were housed two to three per cage with ad libitum
access to food and water during a 12-hour light/dark cycle. All surgical
procedures and treatments were conducted in accordance with guidelines
set by the Ethical Committee for the use of laboratory animals in the
Lund-Malmö region and the European Ethical Committee (86/609 EEC).
Conditional Nurr1 knockout (cKO) mice and the tamoxifeninducible Cre recombinase transgenic line (DATCreERT2) were generated as previously described (44, 59). Crosses between these transgenic
lines allow inducible Nurr1 gene ablation exclusively in DA neurons
by generating mice that are homozygous for the conditional targeted
Nurr1 allele and heterozygous for the DATCreERT2 allele (Nurr1flox/flox;

DATCreERT2/WT). Littermates of genotype Nurr1+/+/DATCreERT2/+
were used as control. For the neuroprotection study, heterozygous mice
Nurr1+/−/DATCreERT2/+ were also used. Wild-type controls and heterozygous and homozygous floxed mice are referred in the manuscript
as Nurr1WT/WT, Nurr1WT/cKO, and Nurr1cKO/cKO mice, respectively.
Ablation of the Nurr1 gene was induced in 1.5-month-old mice by
intraperitoneal injection of tamoxifen [Sigma; 20 mg/ml in ethanol/corn
oil (9:1)] twice daily (2 mg per injection) during five consecutive days.
Mice were housed two to seven per cage with ad libitum access to food
and water during a 12-hour light/dark cycle.
Surgical procedures
All surgical procedures in rats were performed under general anesthesia with a 20:1 mixture of fentanyl citrate (Fentanyl) and medetomidin
hypochloride (Dormitor), injected intraperitoneally. Surgeries in mice
were performed under gaseous anesthesia and analgesia (2% isoflurane
in 2:1 oxygen/nitrous oxide) with a stereotaxic mouse frame (Stoelting).
Vector solutions were injected with a 5- or 10-ml Hamilton syringe
fitted with a glass capillary (outer diameter of 250 mm). Rats received 3 ml
of AAV–a-synuclein, AAV-GFP, or a 1:1 mixture of AAV–a-synuclein
and AAV-Nurr1 or AAV-GFP vectors. Infusion was performed at a rate
of 0.2 ml/min, and the needle was left in place for an additional 3-min
period before it was slowly retracted. Injection was carried out unilaterally
on the right side, above the substantia nigra, at the following coordinates
(flat skull position) (60): anteroposterior, −5.3 mm; mediolateral, −1.7 mm;
dorsoventral, −7.2 mm below dural surface, calculated relative to bregma according to the stereotaxic atlas of Paxinos and Watson (61).
For the neuroprotection study, rats received similar intranigral injection of or a 1:1 mixture of AAV–a-synuclein + AAV-Nurr1 or AAVGFP vectors.
For comparison with the standard toxin model of PD, a set of animals received an injection of 3 ml of 6-OHDA (1 mg/ml free base dissolved in a solution of 0.2 mg/ml L-ascorbic acid in 0.9% w/v NaCl;
Sigma; 0.2 ml/min) in the MFB at the following coordinates (flat skull,
as above): anteroposterior, −4.4 mm; mediolateral, −1.1 mm; dorsoventral, −7.8 mm.
Two weeks after AAV vector injection, or 2 days after 6-OHDA
injection, rats received an injection of human recombinant GDNF
(1 mg in 3 ml) or IGF-1 (1 mg in 3 ml) into the substantia nigra (same
coordinates as above), or into the striatum at the following coordinates
(relative to bregma): anteroposterior, +0.5 mm; mediolateral, −3.1 mm;
dorsoventral, −4.5 mm below dural surface.
Eight to 10 weeks after tamoxifen treatment, mice received an intrastriatal injection of GDNF (1 mg in 1 ml) or IGF-1 (1 mg in 1 ml)
at the following coordinates (relative to bregma): anteroposterior,
+0.5 mm; mediolateral, −1.8 mm; dorsoventral, −2.5 mm below dural
surface. Nigral injection of the AAV-Nurr1 or AAV-GFP vectors (1 ml)
in mice was performed at the following coordinates (relative to bregma): anteroposterior, −2.8 mm; mediolateral, −1.1 mm; dorsoventral,
−4.3 mm below dural surface. For the neuroprotection study, 1.5month-old Nurr1WT/WT, Nurr1WT/cKO, and Nurr1cKO/cKO mice were
treated with tamoxifen as described above and received intranigral
injection of AAV–a-synuclein or AAV-GFP 6 weeks later.
Behavioral testing
Assessment of drug-induced rotational behavior was performed in
automated bowls coupled to the Rotameter software (AccuScan Instruments), as described previously (62). Rats and mice received an

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

12

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

due to restoration of GDNF signaling and transport in the a-synuclein–
overexpressing cells.
In conclusion, our results reveal a new mechanism of action for
a-synuclein–induced neurotoxicity that points to effects on gene
expression as an important pathological mechanism. Thus, a-synuclein–
mediated down-regulation of Nurr1 results in a blockade of GDNFdependent trophic signaling in midbrain DA neurons, pointing to
Nurr1 as a key player in the neuroprotective machinery mobilized in
response to pathological stimuli and cellular stress. In human PD,
increased cellular concentrations of a-synuclein are associated with reduced concentrations of Nurr1 (29, 55), and mutations in the Nurr1
gene that lead to reduced expression of Nurr1 have been linked to the
development of PD (56, 57). Our data show that reduced concentrations of Nurr1 make DA neurons more susceptible to a-synuclein–
induced damage and, moreover, that elevated concentrations of
a-synuclein cause a down-regulation of Nurr1 that is likely to contribute to the progression of the disease. In the AAV–a-synuclein–
overexpressing rat model, down-regulation of Nurr1 happens early,
before any overt cell loss has occurred, indicating that impaired Nurr1
function is an early event linked to the presymptomatic stages of the
neurodegenerative process. Impaired Nurr1 function, in turn, will
cause down-regulation of enzymes and transporters involved in DA
synthesis and release, resulting in synaptic dysfunction in DA neurons,
as well as an increased vulnerability to a-synuclein. Our study shows
that restoration of Nurr1 function by overexpression of Nurr1 provides
almost complete protection against a-synuclein–induced toxicity, as
well as restoration of GDNF signaling.
Together, these data highlight Nurr1 as a promising target for neuroprotective and restorative therapy in PD. The development of drugs
designed to activate Nurr1 function may hold particular promise.
Nurr1 belongs to a nuclear receptor family that can be targeted by
small lipophilic ligands, and as Nurr1 can form heterodimers with RXR
(retinoid X receptor), it seems possible that RXR ligands may be used
to modulate Nurr1 function. Such drugs may be powerful as neuroprotective agents by themselves (58), but they would also be of great
interest as a tool to increase the efficacy of neuroprotective therapies
based on GDNF or neurturin delivery.

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Tissue processing and immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry was performed as described in the Supplementary Materials.
Stereological estimation of nigral neurons and
optical densitometry analysis of fiber density
Assessment of the total number of TH-positive or VMAT-2–positive
neurons in the substantia nigra was made by stereology according to
the optical fractionator principle with the CAST Grid System (Olympus
Denmark A/S), as described (39). Every sixth section covering the
entire extent of the substantia nigra was included in the counting procedure. A coefficient of error of <0.10 was accepted. The data are expressed as a percentage of the corresponding area from the intact side.
Density of TH-positive fibers was measured by densitometry in the
striatum at four coronal levels (+1.2, 0.8, 0.00, and −0.4 mm relative to
bregma) and in the nucleus accumbens at three coronal levels (+2.3,
1.7, and +0.8 mm relative to bregma) with the ImageJ software [version 1.32j; National Institutes of Health (NIH)]. The measured values
were corrected for nonspecific background staining by subtracting
values obtained from the cortex. The data are expressed as a percentage of the corresponding area from the intact side.
Study of gene expression by reverse transcription–qPCR
The animals (n = 5 per group) were sacrificed, the brains were rapidly
removed, and the ventral midbrain, ipsilateral and contralateral to
the site of injection, was dissected and snap-frozen. In an attempt
to dissociate A9 and A10 neuronal populations, the lateral region
comprising the nigral neurons was separated from the medial region
comprising ventral tegmental area neurons under the microscope.
mRNA and miRs were isolated with the miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen)
according to the supplier’s recommendations. RNA concentration
was determined with the NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific), and a 500-ng
quantity of RNA was used for the reverse transcription (RT) performed
with random primers (Invitrogen) and SuperScript III (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Primers were designed with Primer Blast (NIH), and primer sequences are presented
in table S1. For qPCR of miR, we used the Universal cDNA (complementary DNA) Synthesis Kit and LNATM-PCR primer sets against
miR-7, -21, -22, -124, and -153 (Exiqon) (63). SYBR Green qPCR
was performed with LightCycler 480 SYBR Green I Master (Roche)
using standard procedures. Data were quantified by the DDCt method
and normalized to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and
b-actin expression.
Determination of GDNF concentrations by ELISA
The animals (n = 4 per group) were sacrificed, and nigral and striatal
concentrations of endogenous GDNF were determined by a method
previously described (18). Briefly, brains were removed, and ventral
midbrains and striata were dissected and quickly frozen on dry ice.
Tissue samples were sonicated in buffer [150 mM NaCl, 50 mM tris
(pH 7.4), 1% Triton X-100, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (1.7 mg/ml),
leupeptin (1.0 mg/ml), aprotinin (10 mg/ml), and pepstatin (1.0 mg/ml)]
at a concentration of 30 mg/ml. Tissue concentrations of GDNF were

determined on these homogenates by ELISA according to the supplier’s recommendations (IBL-America for detection of rat GDNF,
and Promega G7620 for detection of human GDNF).
In situ hybridization
Animals were perfused as described above, and midbrain was cut on a
cryostat (Leica). Slides were fixed for 10 min in 4% paraformaldehyde, washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), permeabilized with
Protease K for 5 min [Protease K (1 mg/ml) in 50 mM tris-HCl, 5 mM
EDTA solution], and then acetylated for 10 min (1.3% triethanolamine,
0.05% HCl, and 0.25% acetic anhydride). After rinses in PBS, slides
were incubated for 3 hours at room temperature for prehybridization
[50% formamide, 5× SSC, 5× Denharts, Baker’s yeast RNA (250 mg/ml),
and salmon sperm DNA (500 mg/ml)]. Hybridization was performed
overnight at 72°C with digoxigenin-labeled probe for TH, Nurr1, Pitx3,
or DAT. The following day, slides were washed in 72°C heated solutions
of 5× SSC and 0.2× SSC and then equilibrated in B1 [0.1 M tris-HCl
(pH 7.5) and 0.15 M NaCl]. After preincubation for 1 hour in 10%
heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (HIFCS) in B1, the sections were incubated overnight with anti–digoxigenin alkaline phosphatase Fab fragments (Roche; 1:5000 in B1 with 1% HIFCS). After washes in B1,
sections were placed in a solution of 0.1 M tris-HCl (pH 9.5), 0.1 M
NaCl, and 50 mM MgCl2 (B2). Finally, mRNA expression was visualized after overnight incubation with 0.2 mM nitro blue tetrazolium/
bromochloroindolyl phosphate (Roche) and levamisole (0.24 mg/ml)
in 10% poly-(vinyl alcohol)/B2 solution. The reaction was terminated
with water, and sections were mounted in Aquatex (Merck). Photographs
were taken with an Eclipse E1000M microscope (Nikon) coupled to a
digital camera (Spot2; Diagnostic Instruments Inc.).
Statistical analysis
All statistics were conducted with the GraphPad Prism software (version 5.0). All values are presented as means ± SEM. Comparison between experimental groups was performed with a Student’s t test. In
the neuroprotection study, vector × genotype interaction was analyzed
with a two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc test. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/4/163/163ra156/DC1
Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Trophic response induced by intrastriatal injection of human GDNF in nigral DA neurons.
Fig. S2. Expression of GDNF and a-synuclein, GFP transgene expression, and survival of nigral
DA neurons.
Fig. S3. a-Synuclein overexpression represses transcriptional activity in DA neurons.
Fig. S4. IGF-1 signaling is preserved in DA neurons overexpressing a-synuclein.
Table S1. List of RT-qPCR primers.

REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. W. G. Meissner, M. Frasier, T. Gasser, C. G. Goetz, A. Lozano, P. Piccini, J. A. Obeso, O. Rascol,
A. Schapira, V. Voon, D. M. Weiner, F. Tison, E. Bezard, Priorities in Parkinson’s disease research. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 377–393 (2011).
2. L. Aron, R. Klein, Repairing the parkinsonian brain with neurotrophic factors. Trends Neurosci.
34, 88–100 (2011).
3. A. Björklund, D. Kirik, C. Rosenblad, B. Georgievska, C. Lundberg, R. J. Mandel, Towards a
neuroprotective gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease: Use of adenovirus, AAV and lentivirus vectors for gene transfer of GDNF to the nigrostriatal system in the rat Parkinson
model. Brain Res. 886, 82–98 (2000).

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

13

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

intraperitoneal injection of D-amphetamine sulfate (2.5 mg/kg, respectively) (Apoteksbolaget). Right and left full body turns were recorded
over a period of 90 min. Data are expressed as net full turns per minute,
with turns ipsilateral to the injection side assigned a positive value.

4. D. Kirik, B. Georgievska, A. Björklund, Localized striatal delivery of GDNF as a treatment for
Parkinson disease. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 105–110 (2004).
5. J. H. Kordower, M. E. Emborg, J. Bloch, S. Y. Ma, Y. Chu, L. Leventhal, J. McBride, E. Y. Chen,
S. Palfi, B. Z. Roitberg, W. D. Brown, J. E. Holden, R. Pysalski, M. D. Taylor, P. Carvey, Z. Ling,
D. Trono, P. Hantraye, N. Déglon, P. Aebischer, Neurodegeneration prevented by lentiviral
vector delivery of GDNF in primate models of Parkinson’s disease. Science 290, 767–773
(2000).
6. S. Ramaswamy, K. E. Soderstrom, J. H. Kordower, Trophic factors therapy in Parkinson’s
disease. Prog. Brain Res. 175, 201–216 (2009).
7. R. T. Bartus, C. D. Herzog, Y. Chu, A. Wilson, L. Brown, J. Siffert, E. M. Johnson Jr., C. W. Olanow,
E. J. Mufson, J. H. Kordower, Bioactivity of AAV2-neurturin gene therapy (CERE-120): Differences
between Parkinson’s disease and nonhuman primate brains. Mov. Disord. 26, 27–36 (2011).
8. S. S. Gill, N. K. Patel, G. R. Hotton, K. O’Sullivan, R. McCarter, M. Bunnage, D. J. Brooks, C. N. Svendsen,
P. Heywood, Direct brain infusion of glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor in Parkinson
disease. Nat. Med. 9, 589–595 (2003).
9. A. E. Lang, S. Gill, N. K. Patel, A. Lozano, J. G. Nutt, R. Penn, D. J. Brooks, G. Hotton, E. Moro,
P. Heywood, M. A. Brodsky, K. Burchiel, P. Kelly, A. Dalvi, B. Scott, M. Stacy, D. Turner, V. G. Wooten,
W. J. Elias, E. R. Laws, V. Dhawan, A. J. Stoessl, J. Matcham, R. J. Coffey, M. Traub, Randomized
controlled trial of intraputamenal glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor infusion in Parkinson
disease. Ann. Neurol. 59, 459–466 (2006).
10. J. G. Nutt, K. J. Burchiel, C. L. Comella, J. Jankovic, A. E. Lang, E. R. Laws Jr., A. M. Lozano,
R. D. Penn, R. K. Simpson Jr., M. Stacy, G. F. Wooten; ICV GDNF Study Group, Randomized,
double-blind trial of glial cell line–derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in PD. Neurology 60,
69–73 (2003).
11. T. B. Sherer, B. K. Fiske, C. N. Svendsen, A. E. Lang, J. W. Langston, Crossroads in GDNF
therapy for Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 21, 136–141 (2006).
12. J. R. Cannon, J. T. Greenamyre, Neurotoxic in vivo models of Parkinson’s disease recent
advances. Prog. Brain Res. 184, 17–33 (2010).
13. M. J. Devine, K. Gwinn, A. Singleton, J. Hardy, Parkinson’s disease and a-synuclein expression.
Mov. Disord. 26, 2160–2168 (2011).
14. L. L. Venda, S. J. Cragg, V. L. Buchman, R. Wade-Martins, a-Synuclein and dopamine at the
crossroads of Parkinson’s disease. Trends Neurosci. 33, 559–568 (2010).
15. C. Y. Chung, J. B. Koprich, H. Siddiqi, O. Isacson, Dynamic changes in presynaptic and axonal
transport proteins combined with striatal neuroinflammation precede dopaminergic neuronal
loss in a rat model of AAV a-synucleinopathy. J. Neurosci. 29, 3365–3373 (2009).
16. M. Decressac, B. Mattsson, M. Lundblad, P. Weikop, A. Björklund, Progressive neurodegenerative and behavioural changes induced by AAV-mediated overexpression of a-synuclein
in midbrain dopamine neurons. Neurobiol. Dis. 45, 939–953 (2012).
17. M. Lundblad, M. Decressac, B. Mattsson, A. Björklund, Impaired neurotransmission caused
by overexpression of a-synuclein in nigral dopamine neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
109, 3213–3219 (2012).
18. M. Decressac, A. Ulusoy, B. Mattsson, B. Georgievska, M. Romero-Ramos, D. Kirik, A. Björklund,
GDNF fails to exert neuroprotection in a rat a-synuclein model of Parkinson’s disease. Brain
134, 2302–2311 (2011).
19. C. Lo Bianco, N. Déglon, W. Pralong, P. Aebischer, Lentiviral nigral delivery of GDNF does
not prevent neurodegeneration in a genetic rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol.
Dis. 17, 283–289 (2004).
20. L. A. Volpicelli-Daley, K. C. Luk, T. P. Patel, S. A. Tanik, D. M. Riddle, A. Stieber, D. F. Meaney,
J. Q. Trojanowski, V. M. Lee, Exogenous a-synuclein fibrils induce Lewy body pathology
leading to synaptic dysfunction and neuron death. Neuron 72, 57–71 (2011).
21. Z. Lei, Y. Jiang, T. Li, J. Zhu, S. Zeng, Signaling of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
and its receptor GFRa1 induce Nurr1 and Pitx3 to promote survival of grafted midbrainderived neural stem cells in a rat model of Parkinson disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.
70, 736–747 (2011).
22. C. Peng, L. Aron, R. Klein, M. Li, W. Wurst, N. Prakash, W. Le, Pitx3 is a critical mediator of
GDNF-induced BDNF expression in nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. J. Neurosci. 31,
12802–12815 (2011).
23. N. Volakakis, B. Kadkhodaei, E. Joodmardi, K. Wallis, L. Panman, J. Silvaggi, B. M. Spiegelman,
T. Perlmann, NR4A orphan nuclear receptors as mediators of CREB-dependent neuroprotection.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 12317–12322 (2010).
24. N. Bar, R. Dikstein, miR-22 forms a regulatory loop in PTEN/AKT pathway and modulates
signaling kinetics. PLoS One 5, e10859 (2010).
25. X. Ma, M. Kumar, S. N. Choudhury, L. E. Becker Buscaglia, J. R. Barker, K. Kanakamedala,
M. F. Liu, Y. Li, Loss of the miR-21 allele elevates the expression of its target genes and
reduces tumorigenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 10144–10149 (2011).
26. J. Kim, K. Inoue, J. Ishii, W. B. Vanti, S. V. Voronov, E. Murchison, G. Hannon, A. Abeliovich, A
microRNA feedback circuit in midbrain dopamine neurons. Science 317, 1220–1224 (2007).
27. E. Doxakis, Post-transcriptional regulation of a-synuclein expression by mir-7 and mir-153.
J. Biol. Chem. 285, 12726–12734 (2010).
28. E. Junn, K. W. Lee, B. S. Jeong, T. W. Chan, J. Y. Im, M. M. Mouradian, Repression of a-synuclein
expression and toxicity by microRNA-7. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13052–13057 (2009).

29. Y. Chu, W. Le, K. Kompoliti, J. Jankovic, E. J. Mufson, J. H. Kordower, Nurr1 in Parkinson’s
disease and related disorders. J. Comp. Neurol. 494, 495–514 (2006).
30. J. Goers, A. B. Manning-Bog, A. L. McCormack, I. S. Millett, S. Doniach, D. A. Di Monte, V. N. Uversky,
A. L. Fink, Nuclear localization of a-synuclein and its interaction with histones. Biochemistry 42,
8465–8471 (2003).
31. E. Kontopoulos, J. D. Parvin, M. B. Feany, a-Synuclein acts in the nucleus to inhibit histone
acetylation and promote neurotoxicity. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 3012–3023 (2006).
32. H. Schell, T. Hasegawa, M. Neumann, P. J. Kahle, Nuclear and neuritic distribution of serine129 phosphorylated a-synuclein in transgenic mice. Neuroscience 160, 796–804 (2009).
33. M. Wakamatsu, A. Ishii, Y. Ukai, J. Sakagami, S. Iwata, M. Ono, K. Matsumoto, A. Nakamura,
N. Tada, K. Kobayashi, T. Iwatsubo, M. Yoshimoto, Accumulation of phosphorylated a-synuclein
in dopaminergic neurons of transgenic mice that express human a-synuclein. J. Neurosci. Res.
85, 1819–1825 (2007).
34. S. Yu, X. Li, G. Liu, J. Han, C. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Xu, C. Liu, Y. Gao, H. Yang, K. Uéda, P. Chan,
Extensive nuclear localization of a-synuclein in normal rat brain neurons revealed by a
novel monoclonal antibody. Neuroscience 145, 539–555 (2007).
35. Y. Chu, A. L. Mickiewicz, J. H. Kordower, a-Synuclein aggregation reduces nigral myocyte
enhancer factor-2D in idiopathic and experimental Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 41,
71–82 (2011).
36. H. Jin, A. Kanthasamy, A. Ghosh, Y. Yang, V. Anantharam, A. G. Kanthasamy, a-Synuclein
negatively regulates protein kinase Cd expression to suppress apoptosis in dopaminergic
neurons by reducing p300 histone acetyltransferase activity. J. Neurosci. 31, 2035–2051
(2011).
37. M. M. Maxwell, E. M. Tomkinson, J. Nobles, J. W. Wizeman, A. M. Amore, L. Quinti, V. Chopra,
S. M. Hersch, A. G. Kazantsev, The sirtuin 2 microtubule deacetylase is an abundant neuronal
protein that accumulates in the aging CNS. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, 3986–3996 (2011).
38. T. F. Outeiro, E. Kontopoulos, S. M. Altmann, I. Kufareva, K. E. Strathearn, A. M. Amore, C. B. Volk,
M. M. Maxwell, J. C. Rochet, P. J. McLean, A. B. Young, R. Abagyan, M. B. Feany, B. T. Hyman,
A. G. Kazantsev, Sirtuin 2 inhibitors rescue a-synuclein–mediated toxicity in models of Parkinson’s
disease. Science 317, 516–519 (2007).
39. M. Decressac, B. Mattsson, A. Björklund, Comparison of the behavioural and histological
characteristics of the 6-OHDA and a-synuclein rat models of Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol.
235, 306–315 (2012).
40. A. Quesada, H. E. Romeo, P. Micevych, Distribution and localization patterns of estrogen
receptor-b and insulin-like growth factor-1 receptors in neurons and glial cells of the female
rat substantia nigra: Localization of ERb and IGF-1R in the substantia nigra. J. Comp. Neurol.
503, 198–208 (2007).
41. A. Quesada, B. Y. Lee, P. E. Micevych, PI3 kinase/Akt activation mediates estrogen and IGF-1 nigral
DA neuronal neuroprotection against a unilateral rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Dev. Neurobiol.
68, 634–644 (2008).
42. L. Jiang, X. Liu, Z. Chen, Y. Jin, C. E. Heidbreder, A. Kolokythas, A. Wang, Y. Dai, X. Zhou,
MicroRNA-7 targets IGF1R (insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor) in tongue squamous cell
carcinoma cells. Biochem. J. 432, 199–205 (2010).
43. B. Barneda-Zahonero, J. M. Servitja, N. Badiola, A. J. Miñano-Molina, R. Fadó, C. A. Saura,
J. Rodríguez-Alvarez, Nurr1 protein is required for N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptormediated neuronal survival. J. Biol. Chem. 287, 11351–11362 (2012).
44. B. Kadkhodaei, T. Ito, E. Joodmardi, B. Mattsson, C. Rouillard, M. Carta, S. Muramatsu,
C. Sumi-Ichinose, T. Nomura, D. Metzger, P. Chambon, E. Lindqvist, N. G. Larsson, L. Olson,
A. Björklund, H. Ichinose, T. Perlmann, Nurr1 is required for maintenance of maturing and
adult midbrain dopamine neurons. J. Neurosci. 29, 15923–15932 (2009).
45. O. Saucedo-Cardenas, J. D. Quintana-Hau, W. D. Le, M. P. Smidt, J. J. Cox, F. De Mayo,
J. P. Burbach, O. M. Conneely, Nurr1 is essential for the induction of the dopaminergic
phenotype and the survival of ventral mesencephalic late dopaminergic precursor neurons.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 4013–4018 (1998).
46. R. H. Zetterström, L. Solomin, L. Jansson, B. J. Hoffer, L. Olson, T. Perlmann, Dopamine
neuron agenesis in Nurr1-deficient mice. Science 276, 248–250 (1997).
47. W. Le, O. M. Conneely, Y. He, J. Jankovic, S. H. Appel, Reduced Nurr1 expression increases
the vulnerability of mesencephalic dopamine neurons to MPTP-induced injury. J. Neurochem.
73, 2218–2221 (1999).
48. M. R. Walton, I. Dragunow, Is CREB a key to neuronal survival? Trends Neurosci. 23, 48–53
(2000).
49. S. Azeredo da Silveira, B. L. Schneider, C. Cifuentes-Diaz, D. Sage, T. Abbas-Terki, T. Iwatsubo,
M. Unser, P. Aebischer, Phosphorylation does not prompt, nor prevent, the formation of
a-synuclein toxic species in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18, 872–887
(2009).
50. F. M. Jacobs, S. van Erp, A. J. van der Linden, L. von Oerthel, J. P. Burbach, M. P. Smidt, Pitx3
potentiates Nurr1 in dopamine neuron terminal differentiation through release of SMRTmediated repression. Development 136, 531–540 (2009).
51. A. Tomac, J. Widenfalk, L. F. Lin, T. Kohno, T. Ebendal, B. J. Hoffer, L. Olson, Retrograde
axonal transport of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in the adult nigrostriatal system
suggests a trophic role in the adult. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 8274–8278 (1995).

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

14

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

RESEARCH ARTICLE

RESEARCH ARTICLE
64. D. Grimm, Production methods for gene transfer vectors based on adeno-associated virus
serotypes. Methods 28, 146–157 (2002).
65. S. Zolotukhin, B. J. Byrne, E. Mason, I. Zolotukhin, M. Potter, K. Chesnut, C. Summerford,
R. J. Samulski, N. Muzyczka, Recombinant adeno-associated virus purification using novel
methods improves infectious titer and yield. Gene Ther. 6, 973–985 (1999).
66. P. J. Hallett, T. L. Collins, D. G. Standaert, A. W. Dunah, Biochemical fractionation of brain
tissue for studies of receptor distribution and trafficking. Curr. Protoc. Neurosci. Chapter 1,
Unit 1.16 (2008).
Acknowledgments: We thank U. Jarl, E. Ling, M. Sparrenius, J. Johansson, B. Anzelius, and
K. Devaraju for excellent technical assistance and A. Kirkeby and M. Åkerblom for help on the
qPCR experiments. The DATCreERT2 and floxed Nurr1 mice were provided by G. Schütz and
P. Chambon. Funding: The study was supported by grants from the M. J. Fox Foundation,
Swedish Research Council (grant 04X-3874 and the BAGADILICO program), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research, the Ragnar Soderbergs Stiftelse, and the Cure Parkinson’s Trust.
The human material (midbrain sections) was provided by the UK Parkinson’s Disease Society
Tissue Bank at Imperial College. M.D. is supported by a fellowship from the Multipark program.
Author contributions: A.B. and T.P. planned and provided funding for the study; M.D. and B.M.
performed the experiments in rats and the response and neuroprotection assays in the Nurr1
conditional knockout mice; A.L. performed staining of human postmortem brain sections; B.K.
performed the characterization of the Nurr1 conditional knockout mice and performed the in situ
hybridization of rat brain sections; and M.D., A.B., and T.P. wrote the manuscript. Competing interests: A.B. is the Chairman of the Board of Genepod Therapeutics, a company developing an
AAV vector for L-dopa delivery in PD patients. The other authors declare that they have no
competing interests.

Submitted 25 July 2012
Accepted 14 November 2012
Published 5 December 2012
10.1126/scitranslmed.3004676
Citation: M. Decressac, B. Kadkhodaei, B. Mattsson, A. Laguna, T. Perlmann, A. Björklund,
a-Synuclein–induced down-regulation of Nurr1 disrupts GDNF signaling in nigral dopamine
neurons. Sci. Transl. Med. 4, 163ra156 (2012).

www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org

View publication stats

5 December 2012

Vol 4 Issue 163 163ra156

15

Downloaded from stm.sciencemag.org on December 5, 2012

52. S. Jain, J. P. Golden, D. Wozniak, E. Pehek, E. M. Johnson Jr., J. Milbrandt, RET is dispensable
for maintenance of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in adult mice. J. Neurosci. 26, 11230–11238
(2006).
53. E. R. Kramer, L. Aron, G. M. Ramakers, S. Seitz, X. Zhuang, K. Beyer, M. P. Smidt, R. Klein,
Absence of Ret signaling in mice causes progressive and late degeneration of the nigrostriatal
system. PLoS Biol. 5, e39 (2007).
54. A. Pascual, M. Hidalgo-Figueroa, J. I. Piruat, C. O. Pintado, R. Gómez-Díaz, J. López-Barneo,
Absolute requirement of GDNF for adult catecholaminergic neuron survival. Nat. Neurosci.
11, 755–761 (2008).
55. Y. Chu, J. H. Kordower, Age-associated increases of a-synuclein in monkeys and humans
are associated with nigrostriatal dopamine depletion: Is this the target for Parkinson’s disease? Neurobiol. Dis. 25, 134–149 (2007).
56. W. D. Le, P. Xu, J. Jankovic, H. Jiang, S. H. Appel, R. G. Smith, D. K. Vassilatis, Mutations in
NR4A2 associated with familial Parkinson disease. Nat. Genet. 33, 85–89 (2003).
57. P. M. Sleiman, D. G. Healy, M. M. Muqit, Y. X. Yang, M. Van Der Brug, J. L. Holton, T. Revesz,
N. P. Quinn, K. Bhatia, J. K. Diss, A. J. Lees, M. R. Cookson, D. S. Latchman, N. W. Wood,
Characterisation of a novel NR4A2 mutation in Parkinson’s disease brain. Neurosci. Lett.
457, 75–79 (2009).
58. Z. Zhang, X. Li, W. Xie, H. Tuo, S. Hintermann, J. Jankovic, W. Le, Anti-parkinsonian effects of
Nurr1 activator in ubiquitin-proteasome system impairment induced animal model of Parkinson’s
disease. CNS Neurol. Drug Targets 11, 768–773 (2012).
59. D. Engblom, A. Bilbao, C. Sanchis-Segura, L. Dahan, S. Perreau-Lenz, B. Balland, J. R. Parkitna,
R. Luján, B. Halbout, M. Mameli, R. Parlato, R. Sprengel, C. Lüscher, G. Schütz, R. Spanagel,
Glutamate receptors on dopamine neurons control the persistence of cocaine seeking. Neuron
59, 497–508 (2008).
60. E. M. Torres, E. L. Lane, A. Heuer, G. A. Smith, E. Murphy, S. B. Dunnett, Increased efficacy of
the 6-hydroxydopamine lesion of the median forebrain bundle in small rats, by modification
of the stereotaxic coordinates. J. Neurosci. Methods 200, 29–35 (2011).
61. G. Paxinos, C. Watson, The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, 6th ed. (Academic Press,
San Diego, 1986).
62. U. Ungerstedt, G. W. Arbuthnott, Quantitative recording of rotational behavior in rats after
6-hydroxy-dopamine lesions of the nigrostriatal dopamine system. Brain Res. 24, 485–493
(1970).
63. M. Åkerblom, R. Sachdeva, I. Barde, S. Verp, B. Gentner, D. Trono, J. Jakobsson, MicroRNA124 is a subventricular zone neuronal fate determinant. J. Neurosci. 32, 8879–8889 (2012).

