HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2016 January ; 22(Suppl 1): S106–S110. doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.
2015.09.048.

Biomarkers in Parkinson's disease: Advances and strategies
Marion Delenclosa, Daryl R. Jonesa,b, Pamela J. McLeana,c, and Ryan J. Uittid,*
aDepartment of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
bDepartment of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
cMayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA

Author Manuscript

dDepartment of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA

Abstract

Author Manuscript

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive motor
disturbances and affects more than 1% of the worldwide population. Despite considerable progress
in understanding PD pathophysiology, including genetic and biochemical causes, diagnostic
approaches lack accuracy and interventions are restricted to symptomatic treatments. PD is a
complex syndrome with different clinical subtypes and a wide variability in disorder course. In
order to deliver better clinical management of PD patients and discovery of novel therapies, there
is an urgent need to find sensitive, specific, and reliable biomarkers. The development of
biomarkers will not only help the scientific community to identify populations at risk, but also
facilitate clinical diagnosis. Furthermore, these tools could monitor progression, which could
ultimately deliver personalized therapeutic strategies. The field of biomarker discovery in PD has
attracted significant attention and there have been numerous contributions in recent years.
Although none of the parameters have been validated for clinical practice, some candidates hold
promise. This review summarizes recent advances in the development of PD biomarkers and
discusses new strategies for their utilization.

Keywords
Parkinson's disease; Biochemical biomarkers; Imaging; Diagnosis; Progression

1. Introduction
Author Manuscript

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) defines a biomarker as “a characteristic that is
objectively measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal biological processes,
pathogenic processes or pharmacological responses to a therapeutic intervention” (2001). In
other words, a biomarker is a tool to aid physicians, epidemiologists, and scientists in the
study of human diseases by confirming a diagnosis and tracking disease progression, and
may help to identify specific therapeutic targets or determine the efficacy of agents designed
to influence disease progression. In general biomarkers involve measurements of biological

*

Corresponding author. Dept. of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Rd, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. Uitti@mayo.edu (R.J.
Uitti).

Delenclos et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

samples (e.g., plasma, serum, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and biopsy) or measurements using
brain imaging techniques to decipher changes in brain structure and function.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative syndrome after
Alzheimer's disease in the United States. It affects about 1 million Americans over age 65
and up to 10 million individuals worldwide, yet no cure exists and no disease-modifying
therapies have been identified. With its prevalence expected to double within the next two
decades due to the increasing age of the general population, PD is emerging as a socioeconomic burden and a serious challenge for the public health system. The development of
specific biomarkers that reflect disease progression and the discovery of new therapies are
important for better clinical management of PD patients. As such, the establishment of
reliable biomarkers is a subject of intensive investigation; the ideal biomarker being
sensitive, reproducible, inexpensive, noninvasive and thoroughly validated.

Author Manuscript

2. Biomarkers in PD: from better clinical diagnosis to new therapeutics

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

PD is a progressive disease characterized by a complex motor disorder known as
parkinsonism which is manifested by resting tremor, bradykinesia, rigidity and postural
abnormalities. Additionally, many non-motor features are increasingly recognized as being
integral components of the syndrome. The neuropathological hallmarks of PD are a loss of
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the formation of intraneuronal
protein inclusions termed Lewy bodies (LB), which are composed primarily of alphasynuclein (a-syn) [1]. Currently a clinical diagnosis of PD is made by the presence of motor
disturbances, which remains the most important diagnostic marker. Unfortunately, due to
overlap of symptoms with other neurodegenerative disorders such as multiple system
atrophy and progressive supranuclear palsy, misdiagnosis is common and only autopsy can
definitively confirm the disease. Moreover, motor deficits generally appear when a relatively
advanced stage of neurodegeneration is present; indeed 50–60% of dopaminergic neurons in
the SN are already lost prior to the clinical diagnosis, limiting the effectiveness of potential
neuroprotective therapies [2]. It has become clear that PD is not just a movement disorder,
but rather a complex syndrome non-motor symptoms (NMS) including olfactory deficit,
sleep abnormalities, depression, autonomic dysfunction and cognitive disturbances. Indeed,
more than 90% of patients experience NMS during the course of the disease [3]. Many of
these NMS appear years before motor symptoms, and include gastrointestinal dysfunction,
anosmia, and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep disturbances. NMS often become
debilitating as the disease progresses, worsening the quality of life for PD patients.
Additionally, neuropathological changes in the form of aggregated a-syn protein can be
detected in peripheral tissues including skin, the olfactory bulb, and gastrointestinal tract,
and predate the onset of motor symptoms [4]. At this early stage of the disease dopaminergic
neurons are relatively spared. Consequently NMS and peripheral pathology might provide a
window of opportunity for early neuroprotective intervention.
Although no specific biomarkers can be recommended in clinical practice yet, some
interesting candidates exist. As mentioned earlier, PD is a complex disorder with different
clinical subtypes and no clinical or pathological “gold standard” biomarker. Indeed, in the
initial family in which the LRRK2 gene was discovered, all affected individuals manifested

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

a PD phenotype. However, in the four affected individuals from this family in whom brain
autopsies had already been performed, surprisingly there were four different
neuropathological diagnoses described [5]. Therefore, it is unrealistic to expect that a single
biomarker will fulfill all the criteria of accurate diagnosis and disease progression. Indeed,
using a combination of biomarkers is the most likely rational approach (Fig. 1).
Biomarkers of PD are diverse and can be categorized into four main subgroups: clinical,
biochemical, genetic, and imaging. When one group is considered alone the utility of the
biomarker is often limited, but when combined and considered collectively, biomarkers for
PD may be more useful. Also, multimodal assessments may be pivotal for reliable measures
of progression and determination of disorder modification. In the following sections, a brief
summary of existing molecular and imaging biomarkers is presented along with discussion
concerning novel approaches driving the field forward.

Author Manuscript

2.1. Genetic biomarkers

Author Manuscript

The etiology of PD is not entirely understood with 90–95% of cases being idiopathic,
resulting from complex interactions between genes and environmental factors. Nevertheless
a clear genetic component has been identified in the last 15 years. Genetic mutations leading
to familial forms of PD combine a-syn (SNCA), Parkin, PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1),
DJ-1, and Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), and account for 2–3% of all cases with
classical parkinsonism, which is often clinically indistinguishable from idiopathic PD [6].
These discoveries were followed by population-based genome-wide association studies
(GWAS) that identified an additional 20 PD risk loci. Houlden and Singleton [7] recently
summarized the genetic, clinical, and pathological findings of autosomal dominant and
recessive mutations and discussed the discovery of genetic risk loci for PD with an emphasis
on LRRK2 and GBA (glucocerebrosidase). Indeed 5–10% of PD patients have GBA
mutations, numerically making this the most important risk factor for the disease [8]. Even
though this might represent a small percentage of PD cases, genetic studies are invaluable to
elucidate the pathways contributing to clinical diagnosis and most importantly to identify
populations at risk. Genetic causes of parkinsonism may reside in individuals for years and
often decades prior to any development of symptoms, as such “gene positive at-risk”
individuals comprise a unique population in which to study biomarker efficacy in reflecting
disorder progression from asymptomatic to end-stage disease. In this regard, detection of
multiple misregulated genes and their messenger RNA or protein expression may allow the
identification of networks of interacting proteins that reflect the underlying disease process.
Further, proteins associated with disease pathophysiology can be identified as candidate
biomarkers.

Author Manuscript

2.2. Biochemical markers
Searching for biomarkers in body fluids and tissues provides a relatively noninvasive
examination of proteins levels and other molecules specific to the disease. Investigators have
evaluated various potential biomarkers in blood, saliva, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and
biopsies. Because molecular changes in the brain are often reflected in CSF, it represents a
potential source of biomarkers. The identification of proteins associated with PD has been

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript

informed by advances in genetics (Section 2.1), as witnessed in the discovery of SNCA or
DJ-1 genes.

Author Manuscript

a-Syn was the first gene to be linked to PD. A direct link between a-syn and PD is strongly
supported by the discovery that point mutations or multiplications of the gene cause
parkinsonism. a-Syn can be detected in PD patient's CSF, saliva, serum, urine, and also in
the gastrointestinal tract [9]. Seemingly discrepant findings have revealed that PD patients
have significantly lower a-syn levels in CSF than control groups [10] and no association
between a-syn levels and disease severity has been found. The reproducibility of the data
remains challenging with the main issues being sampling protocols, blood contamination
and different operating procedures. Several studies have also attempted to measure a-syn in
blood cells and plasma, but so far the results have been inconsistent. Lastly, recent data have
drawn attention to the presence a-syn in the gut of PD patients after gastroscopy [11]. This
interesting observation requires confirmation in a larger cohort study, but it raises the
possibility of in vivo a-syn histopathology improving the accuracy of PD diagnosis.

Author Manuscript

Mutations in the gene encoding DJ-1 are a rare cause of autosomal recessive PD. DJ-1 is a
protein involved in many cellular functions including response to oxidative stress and is
present in CSF. Elevated levels can been observed in CSF of PD patients; however
conflicting data demonstrate decreased levels of DJ-1 in a large cohort of CSF samples [12].
Much like a-syn, the difference between investigations is attributable to many issues and
future investigations with larger and longitudinally characterized cohorts are needed to
clarify a potential correlation and the possible use of these markers. In addition to a-syn and
DJ-1, other potential protein markers have been linked to an elevated or decreased risk of
developing PD. Apo A1, a major component of high-density lipoprotein, appears to be
reduced in plasma of PD patients, as urate, an antioxidant. Other key proteins involved in PD
pathogenesis such as parkin and ubiquitin could also be investigated as potential markers.
2.3. Neuroimaging markers for PD

Author Manuscript

Several neuroimaging techniques capable of generating higher resolution data have been
developed and their use has been increasingly employed to support the clinical diagnosis of
PD [13]. Single photon emission tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography
(PET), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transcranial sonography (TCS) allow non–
invasive tracking of molecular targets of relevance to neurodegeneration. MRI and TCS can
monitor structural changes in the brain that may suggest increased risk for PD, while PET
and SPECT in conjunction with radioactive metabolic tracers assess function, and may
support the diagnosis as well as monitor disease severity and progression. PD is associated
with nigral degeneration and striatal dopamine deficiency, therefore a gold-standard
biomarker is neuroimaging of the dopamine system. Three classes of radiotracers are
commonly used: 1) 6-[18F] fluorodopa which primarily reflects decarboxylase activity and
storage, 2) [11C]dihydrotetrabenazine (DTBZ) which reflects vesicular monoamine
transporter type 2 (VMAT2), and 3), 2-beta-[11C]carbomethoxy-3-beta-4fluorophenyltropane (CFT) reflecting membranous dopamine transporter (DAT). It is well
established that a progressive reduction in binding of the ligands is observed in PD patients,
reflecting neurodegeneration. PET and SPECT studies may be abnormal before any

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

symptoms or motor signs appear and they progress as neurodegeneration continues [14].
Dopamine-based neuroimaging techniques can be selectively combined with clinical
assessments to increase the certainty of a PD diagnosis. MRI is more widely available than
PET or SPECT and has provided enticing clinical applications to differentiate idiopathic PD
from secondary causes of parkinsonism. In a recent study using MRI techniques to measure
brain iron levels, the authors observed an accumulation in the SN and caudal putamen of
patients with PD evolving over a three-year period, emphasizing its potential as a biomarker
of disease progression [15]. Another MRI technique, voxel-based morphometry, can reveal
volume differences and changes in gray matter density related to disease [16]. This
presumably might function as a surrogate of neuronal numbers. It has been shown to have
some potential applications for the differential diagnosis of parkinsonian syndromes. Indeed
patterns of brain atrophy in patients with and without dementia could be detected with this
measurement [17]. Lastly, TCS reveals hyperechogenicity of SN in 90% of PD patients but
does not appear to correlate well with disease severity or change with disease progression
[18].

Author Manuscript

The use of new markers to assess the non-dopaminergic brain pathways in the pathology of
both motor and non-motor symptoms in PD is also instructive. Loss of cardiac sympathetic
innervation can be detected in PD and decreased uptake of the sympathetic marker I-123metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) was reported in cardiac SPECT [19]. Moreover this
marker contributes to the differential diagnosis between PD and other forms of parkinsonism
such as multiple system atrophy [20]. Interestingly, amyloid deposition assessed by PET
imaging with the Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB), can distinguish PD patients with and
without dementia. Also, neuroinflammation markers of activated microglia such as 11CPK11195 PET have been tested with varying success [21]. Refinement of the analysis and
further development of better tracers is necessary to enable accurate measurement of
neuroinflammation [22]. Lastly, an imaging tracer that detects pathological accumulation of
a-syn could be valuable for diagnostic accuracy and might improve our understanding of
disease progression. Recently, Bagchi and colleagues [23] developed a radioligand that binds
to a-syn fibrils in post-mortem PD brains. While this ligand is not currently available, such
studies are paving the way for the development of novel a-syn imaging markers.
2.4. Clinical markers

Author Manuscript

The presence of clinical signs, particularly the motor features of bradykinesia, rigidity and
resting tremor, is the most important diagnostic marker for PD. Bradykinesia is the physical
examination finding that best correlates with nigrostriatal dopaminergic loss. Curiously, the
particular anatomic neuronal circuitry damage associated with specific clinical findings,
such as resting tremor, has not been identified. Why some patients initially present with
resting tremor while others develop this sign later or never are unexplained. The accurate
diagnosis of patients presenting with parkinsonism has plateaued in the last several decades,
with evaluation after symptomatic duration of 5 years generally leading to the highest level
of accuracy [24,25]. Furthermore, the detection of motor signs reflects a relatively
significant stage in disease progression, as seen in functional imaging and neurochemical
studies.

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

A number of longitudinal studies of agents thought to be potentially disease-modifying have
employed clinical rating scales as the outcome measure. The DATATOP study for example,
the most expensive NIH-sponsored clinical therapeutic trial at the time, used motor scores to
help determine disease progression. While it was initially believed that deprenyl, the
selective MAO-B inhibitor, did not have an immediate impact on clinical symptoms, the
large number of patients studied led to the detection of a significant symptomatic benefit. As
a consequence, while the symptomatic benefit was initially thought to potentially represent a
disease modifying effect, longer follow up determined that deprenyl's symptomatic effect
was the only effect that could be measured in this cohort. Because of the varying presence of
many clinical signs, in conjunction with symptomatic therapies available for PD, the need to
segregate symptomatic from “neuroprotective” action is a frequent challenge.

Author Manuscript

Several non-motor features including REM sleep behavioral disorder, olfactory dysfunction,
depression, and bowel dysfunction often precede the classic motor features of PD,
sometimes by many years. REM sleep behavior disorder in particular is associated with a
higher risk for development of subsequent parkinsonism and dementia [26]. Depression,
personality traits, and reduced interest in new experiences have been associated with early
PD, and olfactory dysfunction is present in over 90% of patients. Smell testing is easily
performed and abnormal testing is associated with greater risk for PD. Test batteries
including olfaction acuity and REM sleep behavior disorder screening questionnaire have
been used in several studies. These are non–invasive and low cost screening tests, but have
limited specificity and sensitivity. Indeed, none of these non-motor manifestations are
specific to PD pathology.

3. Towards new approaches in PD biomarker discovery
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In the last decade new approaches have emerged with the application of “-omics”
techniques. Proteomics, metabolomics and transcriptomics are powerful tools capable of
mass analyses to identify small changes in protein, metabolites or RNA profiles in tissue or
fluids from healthy and diseased individuals [27]. Those techniques are non-targeted
strategies which allow identification of analytes that differ between healthy and non-healthy
subjects, and also from one disease state to another. Recently, Burgos and colleagues [28]
analyzed the micro RNA content in CSF from 67 PD patients and 78 controls. Their study
found RNA profiles reflective of cell-based changes in pathology that could be used to
assess disease progression and therapeutic efficacy. Metabolomics profiling using
electrochemical coulometric array detection to search for biomarkers in plasma may also
uncover potentially useful biomarkers. For example, when comparing plasma from LRRK2
mutated patients to idiopathic PD, metabolomic analysis revealed two distinct profiles [29].
Although information gained through “-omics” techniques are of potential value, issues with
reproducibility of data still remain.
Despite intensive efforts and technological advances in the field of PD biomarkers, no
clinical biomarker has been produced yet. There are significant issues relating to the
inconsistency of results and the different detection systems used among institutions.
Therefore greater attention to standardization of a given assay, as well as appropriate
handling of the biosamples, should be a priority. The other limitation in the search of PD

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

biomarkers is the heterogeneity of the disorder and the presence of shared signs and
symptoms with other diseases. Furthermore, biomarkers need to take into account other
stratification issues among study subjects; biomarkers may play varying roles during
different stages of the disease process. And finally, a single biomarker may not be sufficient
to achieve adequate sensitivity or specificity. Combining clinical or biochemical markers
with imaging markers to define at-risk individuals or to identify premotor PD appears
feasible. The recent work of Campbell and colleagues [30] provide an example of utilizing a
combination of CSF analysis and functional MRI in 43 PD patients. The CSF a-syn level
correlated with reduced sensorimotor connectivity seen in fMRI in their study.

Author Manuscript

To accelerate the research of biomarkers in this direction future effort may profit from
collaborative work with standard procedures and large population-based cohort studies. In
2002 an initiative called The Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI), sponsored
by the Michael J. Fox Foundation, and was launched. The 5-year longitudinal study involves
more than 500 subjects (early PD and age-matched healthy individuals) in clinical sites from
Europe, USA and Australia. Highly standardized clinical, neuroimaging, and biological data
are collected and is available to the research community, making the PPMI a valuable
resource for investigation, innovation, and validation of promising biomarkers.

4. Concluding remarks

Author Manuscript

The development and validation of biomarkers represents an urgent need for better clinical
management of PD patients. Although much remains to be done, the search for appropriate
PD biomarkers has begun to provide tools that could lead to clinical testing and have a
dramatic impact upon therapeutic trial design. As discussed in this review and illustrated in
Fig. 1, a single measure is unlikely to become a useful biomarker. Priority should be given to
studies that allow assessment of combinations of clinical, laboratory, imaging, and genetic
data, as well as seeking standardization of the assays associated with such assessments.
Appropriate refinement of novel technology promises to result in the development of
biomarkers that better diagnose PD and improve the efficacy of disease-modifying therapies.

References

Author Manuscript

1. Stefanis L. alpha-Synuclein in Parkinson's disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2012;
2:a009399. [PubMed: 22355802]
2. Fearnley JM, Lees AJ. Ageing and Parkinson's disease: substantia nigra regional selectivity. Brain.
1991; 114(Pt 5):2283–2301. [PubMed: 1933245]
3. Shulman LM, Taback RL, Bean J, Weiner WJ. Comorbidity of the nonmotor symptoms of
Parkinson's disease. Mov. Disord. 2001; 16:507–510. [PubMed: 11391746]
4. Halliday GM, Del Tredici K, Braak H. Critical appraisal of brain pathology staging related to
presymptomatic and symptomatic cases of sporadic Parkinson's disease. J. Neural Transm. Suppl.
2006:99–103. [PubMed: 17017515]
5. Uitti RJ, Calne DB, Dickson DW, Wszolek ZK. Is the neuropathological 'gold standard' diagnosis
dead? Implications of clinicopathological findings in an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative
disorder. Park. Relat. Disord. 2004; 10:461–463.
6. Klein C, Schlossmacher MG. Parkinson disease 10 years after its genetic revolution: multiple clues
to a complex disorder. Neurology. 2007; 69:2093–2104. [PubMed: 17761553]
7. Houlden H, Singleton AB. The genetics and neuropathology of Parkinson's disease. Acta
Neuropathol. 2012; 124:325–338. [PubMed: 22806825]
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

8. Beavan M, McNeill A, Proukakis C, Hughes DA, Mehta A, Schapira AH. Evolution of prodromal
clinical markers of Parkinson disease in a GBA mutation-positive cohort. JAMA Neurol. 2015;
72:201–208. [PubMed: 25506732]
9. Malek N, Swallow D, Grosset KA, Anichtchik O, Spillantini M, Grosset DG. Alpha-synuclein in
peripheral tissues and body fluids as a biomarker for Parkinson's disease - a systematic review. Acta
Neurol. Scand. 2014; 130:59–72. [PubMed: 24702516]
10. Mollenhauer B, El-Agnaf OM, Marcus K, Trenkwalder C, Schlossmacher MG. Quantification of
alpha-synuclein in cerebrospinal fluid as a biomarker candidate: review of the literature and
considerations for future studies. Biomark. Med. 2010; 4:683–699. [PubMed: 20945981]
11. Sanchez-Ferro A, Rabano A, Catalan MJ, Rodriguez-Valcarcel FC, Fernandez Diez S, HerrerosRodriguez J, et al. In vivo gastric detection of alpha-synuclein inclusions in Parkinson's disease.
Mov. Disord. 2015; 30:517–524. [PubMed: 25113060]
12. Hong Z, Shi M, Chung KA, Quinn JF, Peskind ER, Galasko D, et al. DJ-1 and alpha-synuclein in
human cerebrospinal fluid as biomarkers of Parkinson's disease. Brain. 2010; 133:713–726.
[PubMed: 20157014]
13. Pavese N, Brooks DJ. Imaging neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease. Biochim. Biophys. Acta.
2009; 1792:722–729. [PubMed: 18992326]
14. Ravina B, Marek K, Eberly S, Oakes D, Kurlan R, Ascherio A, et al. Dopamine transporter
imaging is associated with long-term outcomes in Parkinson's disease. Mov. Disord. 2012;
27:1392–1397. [PubMed: 22976926]
15. Ulla M, Bonny JM, Ouchchane L, Rieu I, Claise B, Durif F. Is R2* a new MRI biomarker for the
progression of Parkinson's disease? A longitudinal follow-up. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e57904.
[PubMed: 23469252]
16. Summerfield C, Junque C, Tolosa E, Salgado-Pineda P, Gomez-Anson B, Marti MJ, et al.
Structural brain changes in Parkinson disease with dementia: a voxel-based morphometry study.
Arch. Neurol. 2005; 62:281–285. [PubMed: 15710857]
17. Beyer MK, Janvin CC, Larsen JP, Aarsland D. A magnetic resonance imaging study of patients
with Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive impairment and dementia using voxel-based
morphometry. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry. 2007; 78:254–259. [PubMed: 17028119]
18. Berg D, Behnke S, Seppi K, Godau J, Lerche S, Mahlknecht P, et al. Enlarged hyperechogenic
substantia nigra as a risk marker for Parkinson's disease. Mov. Disord. 2013; 28:216–219.
[PubMed: 23115051]
19. Taki J, Yoshita M, Yamada M, Tonami N. Significance of 123I-MIBG scintigraphy as a
pathophysiological indicator in the assessment of Parkinson's disease and related disorders: it can
be a specific marker for Lewy body disease. Ann. Nucl. Med. 2004; 18:453–461. [PubMed:
15515743]
20. Druschky A, Hilz MJ, Platsch G, Radespiel-Troger M, Druschky K, Kuwert T, et al. Differentiation
of Parkinson's disease and multiple system atrophy in early disease stages by means of I-123MIBG-SPECT. J. Neurol. Sci. 2000; 175:3–12. [PubMed: 10785250]
21. Gerhard A, Pavese N, Hotton G, Turkheimer F, Es M, Hammers A, et al. In vivo imaging of
microglial activation with [11C](R)-PK11195 PET in idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Neurobiol.
Dis. 2006; 21:404–412. [PubMed: 16182554]
22. Bartels AL, Willemsen AT, Doorduin J, de Vries EF, Dierckx RA, Leenders KL. [11C]-PK11195
PET: quantification of neuroinflammation and a monitor of anti-inflammatory treatment in
Parkinson's disease? Park. Relat. Disord. 2010; 16:57–59.
23. Bagchi DP, Yu L, Perlmutter JS, Xu J, Mach RH, Tu Z, et al. Binding of the radioligand SIL23 to
alpha-synuclein fibrils in Parkinson disease brain tissue establishes feasibility and screening
approaches for developing a Parkinson disease imaging agent. PLoS One. 2013; 8:e55031.
[PubMed: 23405108]
24. Rajput AH, Rajput A. Accuracy of Parkinson disease diagnosis unchanged in 2 decades.
Neurology. 2014; 83:386–387. [PubMed: 24975858]
25. Adler CH, Beach TG, Hentz JG, Shill HA, Caviness JN, Driver-Dunckley E, et al. Low clinical
diagnostic accuracy of early vs advanced Parkinson disease: clinicopathologic study. Neurology.
2014; 83:406–412. [PubMed: 24975862]

Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

26. Boeve BF. Idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder in the development of Parkinson's disease.
Lancet Neurol. 2013; 12:469–482. [PubMed: 23578773]
27. Caudle WM, Bammler TK, Lin Y, Pan S, Zhang J. Using 'omics' to define pathogenesis and
biomarkers of Parkinson's disease. Expert Rev. Neurother. 2010; 10:925–942. [PubMed:
20518609]
28. Burgos K, Malenica I, Metpally R, Courtright A, Rakela B, Beach T, et al. Profiles of extracellular
miRNA in cerebrospinal fluid and serum from patients with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases
correlate with disease status and features of pathology. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e94839. [PubMed:
24797360]
29. Johansen KK, Wang L, Aasly JO, White LR, Matson WR, Henchcliffe C, et al. Metabolomic
profiling in LRRK2-related Parkinson's disease. PLoS One. 2009; 4:e7551. [PubMed: 19847307]
30. Campbell MC, Koller JM, Snyder AZ, Buddhala C, Kotzbauer PT, Perlmutter JS. CSF proteins and
resting-state functional connectivity in Parkinson disease. Neurology. 2015; 84:2413–2421.
[PubMed: 25979701]

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

Delenclos et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Fig. 1.

Biomarkers of Parkinson's disease: A single biomarker cannot reflect the complexity of the
disorder. Clinical, laboratory, imaging, and genetic data need to be judiciously combined to
accurately predict disease status and progression.

Author Manuscript
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 01.

