Deficits in Memory Tasks of Mice with CREB
Mutations Depend on Gene Dosage
Peter Gass,1,4 David P. Wolfer,2 Detlef Balschun,3 Dorothea Rudolph,1
Uwe Frey,3 Hans-Peter Lipp,2 and Günther Schütz1
1

Department of Molecular Biology of the Cell I
German Cancer Research Institute
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
2
Department of Anatomy
University of Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
3
Department of Gene Regulation and Plasticity
Federal Institute for Neurobiology
Magdeburg, Germany

preference task nor in dentate gyrus and
CA1 LTP as recorded from slice
preparations. These data indicate that the
hybrid vigor typical for F1 hybrids may
compensate for a reduction in CREB levels
in some tests. On the other hand, the
persistence of clear behavioral deficits as
shown by the F1 hybrid CREBcomp mice in
water maze and fear conditioning indicates
a robust and repeatable phenomenon that
will permit further functional analysis of
CREB.

Abstract
Studies in Aplysia, Drosophila, and mice
have shown that the transcription factor
CREB is involved in formation and retention
of long-term memory. To analyze the impact
of differential CREB levels on learning and
memory, we varied the gene dosage of CREB
in two strains of mutant mice: (1) CREB␣⌬
mice, in which the ␣ and ⌬ isoforms are
disrupted, but a third isoform ␤ is strongly
up-regulated; (2) CREBcomp, a compound
strain with one ␣⌬ allele and one CREBnull
allele in which all CREB isoforms are
disrupted. To minimize genetic background
effects, CREB mutations were backcrossed
into a C57BL/6 and a FVB/N strain,
respectively, and studies were performed in
F1 hybrids from these lines. CREBcomp but
not CREB␣⌬ F1 hybrids were impaired in
water maze learning and fear conditioning,
demonstrating a CREB gene dosage effect.
However, analysis of the platform searching
strategies in the water maze task suggested
that CREBcomp mutants are impaired in
behavioral flexibility rather than in spatial
memory. In contrast to previous
experiments using CREB␣⌬ mice with
different genetic background, the F1 hybrid
CREB␣⌬ and CREBcomp mice did not show
deficits in a social transmission of food
4

Introduction
The transcription factor CREB (cAMP response
element-binding) protein is activated by diverse
signal transduction pathways influenced by cAMP
and calcium and is thought to be involved in the
neuronal signaling processes leading to the formation of long-term memory (LTM) (Frank and Greenberg 1994; Bailey et al. 1996). Recent studies in
invertebrates [Aplysia (Dash et al. 1990; Bartsch et
al. 1995); Drosophila (Yin et al. 1994, 1995)] and
vertebrates [mice (Bourtchuladze et al. 1994; Kogan et al. 1996); rats (Guzowski and McGaugh
1997)] indicated that the specific role of CREB in
LTM formation is conserved during evolution.
CREB has been shown to participate in associative
and nonassociative forms of learning as well as being critical for the consolidation of explicit and
implicit memory. A coincidence of deficits in behavioral learning tasks and in electrophysiological
correlates of learning and memory has been re-

Corresponding author.

LEARNING & MEMORY 5:274–288 © 1998 by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN1072-0502/98 $5.00

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
274

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

ground of C57BL/6x129SVJ, respectively (Kogan
et al. 1996). The role of the genetic background
was not systematically addressed. Therefore, we
decided to investigate the role of CREB for behavioral learning and LTP in mice with a better defined
genetic background, using F1 hybrids. Furthermore, the availability of a mouse strain with disruption of all CREB isoforms (CREBnull) allowed us
to study the effects of gene dosage (Rudolph et al.
1998). Although mice homozygous for this mutation turned out to be lethal owing to postnatal
respiratory failure, heterozygous mice can be used
to further reduce the CREB gene dosage of
CREB␣⌬ animals by intercrossing. This resulted in
a mouse strain with only one allele coding for the
␤ isoform, which survives without any gross abnormalities in behavior (Rudolph et al. 1998). For the
present study, CREB␣⌬ and CREBnull mutations
were backcrossed into the C57BL/6 and the
FVB/N background, respectively. F1 hybrids with a
stepwise loss of CREB gene dosage were generated
from intercrosses of these lines: CREB␣⌬ mice
with two ␣⌬ alleles and compound mice (CREBcomp) with one ␣⌬ and one null allele. The present study analyzed the effects of these mutations
on different behavioral learning and LTP paradigms.

ported in both invertebrates (Dash et al. 1990; Bartsch et al. 1995) and vertebrates (Bourtchuladze et
al. 1994) following manipulations of CREB genes
or their products. Mice with a hypomorphic CREB
allele generated by homologous recombination
(Hummler et al. 1994) displayed deficits in water
maze learning and fear conditioning that coincided
with an impairment of long-term potentiation
(LTP) (Bourtchuladze et al. 1994), a correlate of
learning and memory at the cellular level (Bliss
and Collingridge 1993). In these mice, the two major physiological isoforms of CREB, ␣ and ⌬, are
disrupted, whereas a third isoform, ␤, as well as
several activator and repressor forms of CREM are
up-regulated (Hummler et al. 1994; Blendy et al.
1996).
Recent studies have indicated that learning
and memory in mice with and without specific
genetic mutations are strongly influenced by the
genetic background of the animals (Gerlai 1996;
Owen et al. 1997; Wolfer et al. 1997; Giese et al.
1998; for review, see Lathe 1996). Thus, specific
mutations can have different phenotypes in different genetic backgrounds (Hsiao et al. 1996; Banbury Conference on Genetic Background in Mice
1997; Wolfer et al. 1997). Because the identity of
the genetic elements controlling these modifying
factors are usually unknown, it is important to
keep them constant when evaluating the impact of
a mutation. To overcome strain-specific limitations
of behavioral testing, use of F1 hybrids of two different inbred strains is recommended (Banbury
Conference on Genetic Background in Mice 1997).
This offers the advantage of hybrid vigor, that is,
outperformance of the parental lines by the hybrids, but should also reduce the variability of
learning tests, because all littermates have a similar
genetic make-up (apart from the immediate vicinity of the mutated locus). It should further improve
the reproducibility of specific phenotypes when
analyzed in different laboratories or at later time
points.
In view of these recent findings and recommendations, the earlier experiments with CREB␣⌬
mice have to be validated (Bourtchuladze et al.
1994; Kogan et al. 1996). The genetic background
of these animals displaying deficits in water maze
learning, fear conditioning, and LTP was a mixture
of alleles from C57BL/6 and 129Svev (Bourtchuladze et al. 1994). A second study reproduced the
behavioral deficits in fear conditioning and water
maze tasks using CREB␣⌬ mice predominantly on a
C57BL/6 background (>87%) or on an F2 back-

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

Materials and Methods
ANIMALS

Generation of the CREB␣⌬ and the CREBnull
alleles has been described elsewhere (Hummler et
al. 1994; Blendy et al. 1996; Rudolph et al. 1998).
The CREB␣⌬ allele was backcrossed into the
C57BL/6 background and the FVB/N background
(both from Charles River, Sulzfeld, Germany), the
CREBnull allele was backcrossed into the C57BL/6
background. All experiments were performed in F1
hybrid mice that were progeny from intercrosses
of F6 or F7 backcross generations of these two
backgrounds. We investigated F1 hybrid wild-type
mice, F1 hybrids homozygous for the ␣⌬ allele
(= CREB␣⌬), and F1 hybrids with one ␣⌬ and one
null allele (= CREBcomp). Ten wild-type mice and
10 CREBcomp mice used in the first version of the
water maze (six trials per day, see below) were
derived from intercrosses of F6 backcross generations, as well as the 10 wild-type mice and 10
CREBcomp mice used for the social transmission of
food preference studies. All other studies were performed in intercrosses from F7 backcross genera-

&
275

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

(18 trials, acquisition phase). Afterwards, it was
placed in the opposite quadrant for 2 days (12 trials, reversal phase). In all trials, mice were left
swimming until they found the platform or 120 sec
had elapsed. The first 60 sec of the first trial during
the reversal phase served as probe trial for spatial
retention. In the other schedule of the test, 14
wild-type, 10 CREB␣⌬ and 13 CREBcomp mice
were investigated. Animals had only two training
trials per day (with an interval of 1 min) over a
period of 14 consecutive days. The 1-min intertrial
interval was spent on the platform. If an animal did
not find the platform in the first trial, it was placed
on it after 1 min. Probe trial (free swimming without the platform in the pool) was performed on
day 10 and day 15. Statistical analysis of learning
curves was done on average blocks of two trials in
both schedules. Data were analyzed by a repeated
two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for genotype (CREBwildtype, CREB␣⌬, CREBcomp) and
trial block within subjects (either 14 or 15 depending on schedule). Analysis of probe trials (spatial
retention) included genotype (as above) and quadrant times (or platform/annulus crossings) as repeated factors (old target quadrant vs. averaged
adjacent control quadrants). Differences between
groups were analyzed by planned post hoc Scheffe
comparisons. Because the direction of the CREB
and schedule effects were predicted from earlier
studies, the probabilities for pairwise comparisons
of groups are given as one-tailed P values if not
mentioned otherwise.

tions. In the fear conditioning study, an F2 progeny
from C57BL/6 and 129/Svev was used as an additional control group. Genotyping was carried out
with the PCR on tail DNA samples (Rudolph et al.
1998). All experiments were performed blindly
with respect to the genotype of the mice. All experiments were performed with mice 2–6 months
old, and a similar number of males and females
were used. Mice were kept on a 12:12-hr light–
dark cycle. All experiments were performed during the light phase of the cycle, with the exception
of the water maze studies that were conducted
during the dark cycle.
WATER MAZE STUDIES

Morris water maze experiments were performed in the same water maze with two different
training protocols (Morris et al. 1982). One version
comprised six training trials per day with 1-hr intertrial intervals, which has been used to study
nearly 2000 mice during recent years (Wolfer et al.
1997; D.P. Wilfer, M. Bozicevic-Stagliar, and H.P.
Lipp, unpubl.). A second version consisted of two
training trials per day and a 1-min intertrial interval,
which had been used to characterize CREB␣⌬
mice in earlier experiments by Kogan et al. (1996).
Pool, platform, and visual cues were identical as
described earlier (Wolfer et al. 1997; D.P. Wolfer,
M. Bozicevic-Stagliar, and H.P. Lipp, unpubl.). The
swim paths of the mice were recorded using a
video camera suspended above the center of the
pool and were fed to an electronic imaging system
recording the xy-coordinates (Noldus EthoVision
1.90.). The recorded paths were analyzed off-line
by special software (WINTRACK, by D.P. Wolfer).
The following variables were analyzed: time to find
platform (s), length of swim path (m), swim speed
while moving (m/s), percent of time spent floating, percent of time spent within a rim of 22 cm
from the wall (thigmotaxis), percent of time swimming in parallel to the wall, number of wall
touches, percent of time in target quadrant, average distance to the target, percent of time spent in
former target quadrant and other quadrants, and
number of annulus crossings over the former platform position and over the annulus in control
quadrants. In the first version of the test, 19 wildtype, 12 CREB␣⌬, and 18 CREBcomp mice were
investigated. The entire procedure took 5 days;
each mouse did a total of 30 trials, 6 trials per day
with a 1-hr intertrial interval. The position of the
hidden platform remained fixed for the first 3 days

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

FEAR CONDITIONING STUDIES

The conditioning system (commercially available from TSE, Bad Homburg, Germany) consisted
of a soundproof box (58 × 30 × 27 cm3) with a
gray interior, a 12-V light at the ceiling, a fan, a
speaker, and a Plexiglas chamber (35 × 20 × 20
cm3) that was placed on a shock grid made of stainless steel rods (0.4 cm diam., spaced 0.9 cm apart).
The grid was connected to a shocker/scrambler
unit delivering shocks of defined duration and intensity. Experiments were performed according to
the protocol of Bourtchuladze et al. (1994). For
both contextual and cued conditioning experiments, mice were placed into the Plexiglas chamber for 2 min before the onset of a discrete conditioned stimulus (2.800-Hz tone, 85 dB) that lasted
30 sec. At the end of the tone, animals were subjected to the unconditioned stimulus (2 sec of continuous footshock at 0.75 mA). Animals were left in

&
276

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

were tested for food preference 24 hr following
the interaction session. They were given a free
choice between two food cups with cinnamon or
cocoa, respectively, for 2 hr. Thereafter, the total
amount of each food eaten was determined.
Twenty-one wild-type, 10 CREB␣⌬, and 10 CREBcomp mice were tested. Student’s t-test was applied for comparison of the total amount of cued
food versus noncued food eaten by each group
(wild type, CREB␣⌬, CREBcomp). Errors indicated
are S.E.M.

the conditioning chamber for another 30 sec and
were then placed back into their home cages. Conditioning was assessed by measuring freezing, defined as a complete lack of movement besides respiration. For contextual conditioning, freezing was
measured for 5 min in the chamber in which the
animals were trained. For analyzing cued conditioning, animals were placed in a novel context
(triangular cage with nongrid floor) for 3 min, after
which they were exposed to the conditioned
stimulus for another 3 min. For contextual and
cued conditioning, freezing was scored in 10-sec
intervals, and the score was calculated in percent
of total observation time. The retention of freezing
24 hr after training was investigated in 20 F1 wildtype, 12 F1 CREB␣⌬, and 12 F1 CREBcomp mice,
and furthermore in 12 animals of pure C57BL/6
background and 18 animals that were an F2 progeny from C57BL/6 and 129Svev. Short-term
memory (0.5-hr test) was analyzed in 12 wild-type,
12 CREB␣⌬, and 12 CREBcomp mice, all F1 hybrids. For statistical analysis of the data, a one-way
ANOVA was used to analyze performance across
the different groups for contextual and cued conditioning, respectively. Student’s t-test in combination with the Bonferroni/Dunn correction was applied for post-hoc comparisons of specific pairs of
experimental groups. Errors indicated are standard
errors of the mean (S.E.M.).

LTP

Electrophysiological recordings were performed as described previously (Frey et al. 1988,
1996), except that the mice were briefly anesthetized (<15 sec) with chloroform before decapitation. For recordings in the CA1 region, slices were
incubated in an interface chamber at 32°C and a
flow rate of artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) of
1 ml/min. After a 4- to 5-hr preincubation period,
two monopolar, lacquer-coated, stainless-steel
electrodes were placed in different sublayers of the
stratum radiatum to stimulate two different inputs
to the same population of pyramidal cells. For recording, two electrodes were positioned in the
CA1 dendritic and cell body layer. The population
spike (mV) was evaluated by taking the voltage
difference between onset and peak. The slope
function (mV/msec) of the field excitatory postsynaptic potential (fEPSP) was calculated from
eight successive points of the steepest 400-µsec
segment. Subsequently, input/output (I/O) curves
were constructed, and the stimulation strength
was adjusted to elicit a population spike of 25% of
the maximum. Once stable, responses were obtained for 60 min; LTP was induced in one input by
either a ‘‘weak’’ or a ‘‘strong’’ tetanization protocol. The weak tetanization protocol consisted of 21
pulses at 100 Hz (duration, 0.2 msec per polarity);
the strong tetanization protocol consisted of three
stimulus trains of 100 pulses at 100 Hz, with a
10-min intertrain interval (duration, 0.2 msec per
polarity). The weak tetanization protocol induces a
protein synthesis-independent, decremental potentiation under most circumstances, whereas the
strong paradigm was repeatedly described to generate protein synthesis-dependent late LTP (Frey et
al. 1988; Frey and Morris 1997). Four 0.2-Hz biphasic, constant-current pulses (0.1 msec per polarity)
were used for testing 1, 3, 5, 11, 15, 21, 25, and 30
min post-tetanus and thereafter once every 15 min.

SOCIAL TRANSMISSION OF FOOD
PREFERENCE STUDIES

The social transmission of food preference
task was in principle performed as described by
Kogan and colleagues (1996). Training and testing
comprised three main stages. First, a demonstrator
mouse was allowed to eat powdered ground chow
scented with either cinnamon (1% wt/wt) or cocoa (2% wt/wt). Second, the demonstrator mouse
(for cinnamon or cocoa, respectively) and a littermate observer mouse (= memory-tested mouse)
were allowed to freely interact for 10 min. In contrast to the protocol of Kogan et al. (1996), only
one demonstrator mouse was used for each litter
(for a 10-min continuous interaction) instead of
two different demonstrator mice (for two 5-min
interactions spaced by 1 min), because some litters
did not contain enough wild-type mice to choose
two demonstrators. To avoid a potential bias for
one scent, half of the mice were presented with
cinnamon-scented food and the other half with cocoa-scented food. In the third phase, observer mice

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
277

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

ence for the trained goal position (Fig. 1C). They
spent ∼40% of their time in the trained quadrant (as
compared with the left and right control sites) and
crossed the trained goal position (annulus crossing) approximately three times more often than
the respective sites of the adjacent quadrants (Fig.
1D). With respect to annulus crossings, CREBcomp
mice differed significantly from wild types and
failed to show a preference for the trained location
(P < 0.038; Fig. 1D). However, CREBcomp mice
did not differ statistically from wild types with respect to relative quadrant time, even though they
spent only ∼35% of their time in the trained quadrant (Fig. 1C). No significant differences were
found for swim speed, percentage of time floating
passively, or sex effects.
Because this training protocol may have been
too stringent to detect more subtle differences between the three genotypes, we tested another set
of animals in a protocol that has been reported to
be more sensitive for the detection of LTM deficits
in mice with CREB mutations (Kogan et al. 1996).
Using two training trials per day with a 1-min intertrial interval, all three genotypes improved during the training period (Fig. 2A). Performance was
not the same in all groups as shown by ANOVA for
path lenght (P < 0.017; Table 1). Post-hoc comparisons exhibited significantly longer escape paths for
CREBcomp mice than wild-type controls (P < 0.01)
as well as an increased average distance to the goal
(P < 0.002, data not shown). CREB␣⌬ were in between wild types and CREBcomp mice. They had
slightly longer paths than controls, but this trend
was not significant. However, they showed an
increased average distance to the goal as compared with controls (P < 0.05; data not shown).
Probe trials demonstrated moderately significant
effects of CREB deficiency on spatial retention
(P < 0.045). Wild-type controls spent 38% of their
time in the trained quadrant (Fig. 2C), and crossed
the trained goal position approximately twice as
often as adjacent control sites (Fig. 2D). With respect to both relative quadrant time and annulus
crossings, CREB␣⌬ mice did not differ statistically
from wild-type mice, even though they spent, on
average, only 33% of their time in the trained quadrant (Fig. 2C,D). In contrast, CREBcomp animals
searched only at chance level (26%), leading to a
significant difference with respect to place preference when compared with controls (P <0.01; Fig.
2C). The number of annulus crossings showed the
same order of groups (wild-types > REB␣⌬ > CREBcomp); however, the variability of scores pre-

LTP was recorded for at least 2 hr and evaluated by
the initial magnitude of potentiation (1 min after
tetanus), and the maintanance of potentiation was
assessed 2 hr post-tetanus.
The recording in the dentate gyrus was conducted as in CA1 with the following exceptions:
Slices were kept in a submerged slice chamber,
and a monopolar, lacquer-coated steel electrode
was placed in the stratum moleculare of the dentate gyrus to stimulate the medial perforant-path
input, which was distinguished by its localization
and the presence of paired pulse depression at an
interpulse interval of 40 msec. The recording electrode was lowered to the same level, but ∼200 µm
apart to record fEPSPs. After I/O curves were generated by recording fEPSP slopes at an increasing
stimulation intensity, the stimulation voltage was
adjusted to elicit a fEPSP slope of 35% of the maximum. LTP was induced by a triple tetanization consisting of 15 bursts of eight pulses at 200 Hz, with
an interburst interval of 200 msec, applied three
times every 10 min. In all experiments, the recording of slices from mutant mice was interleaved
by experiments with wild-type controls. Statistical
analysis was performed using the two-tailed MannWhitney U test (between-group differences) and
the Wilcoxon matched pairs signed-rank test
(within group differences) at a significance level of
P < 0.05.

Results
LEARNING PERFORMANCE AND SPATIAL
RETENTION IN THE WATER MAZE TASK ARE
DEPENDENT ON GENE DOSAGE OF CREB

Two different protocols of the water maze test
were used. All statistical data for the parameters
investigated in both schedules are given in Table 1.
In the more intense schedule with six training trials per day, all three genotypes (F1 hybrid wild
types and CREB␣⌬ and CREBcomp mice) demonstrated improvement of escape performance during aquisition and reversal phase as revealed by
decreasing swim path lengths (Fig. 1A). However,
performance was not the same in the groups as
revealed by ANOVA for path length (P < 0.027;
Fig. 1A). Comparisons between groups showed
small but significant differences between wild-type
mice and CREBcomp animals as well as between
CREB␣⌬ and CREBcomp (P < 0.05, respectively)
but surprisingly not between wild-type and
CREB␣⌬ mice. During the probe trial, wild-type
and CREB␣⌬ mice exhibited a significant prefer-

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
278

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

Table 1: ANOVA in two samples of mice trained using different water maze schedules
Planned post hoc
comparisonsb
ANOVA factorsa
Samples and variables

factor 1

factor 2

wt
vs.
␣⌬

interaction

wt
vs.
comp.

␣⌬
vs.
comp.

(n.s.) Not significant.
a
(Factor 1) Genotype; (factor 2) trial blocks or quadrants; (interaction) genotype × trial blocks/quad.
b
(␣⌬) CREB ␣/⌬ mutants; (comp.) CREBcomp mutants; (wt) wild types. (P = 0.0xx) Statistical trend. P values one-tailed,
Scheffe.

vented significant genotype × place interactions as
well as significant pairwise differences between
genotypes. An additional probe trial had already
been performed at day 10 to exclude the possibility that more pronounced differences between
wild-type and CREB␣⌬ mice were present at an
earlier time point (data not shown). Although performance of CREBcomp mice did not improve between day 10 and day 14, performance of wild-type
and CREB␣⌬ animals improved in parallel, that is,
the deficits between wild-type and CREB␣⌬ mice
on the one hand and CREBcomp mice on the other
were more evident after 14 days than after 10 days
of training.
In summary, no statistically significant deficits
were found for CREB␣⌬ mice in the six trials per
day test, whereas CREBcomp animals showed

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

weak deficits in acquisition of the task (path
length) and memory retention (annulus crossings)
(Fig. 1). In the two trials per day version, CREB␣⌬
mice showed a performance intermediate between
wild-type and CREBcomp mice. Whereas the deficits of CREB␣⌬ mice were statistically only significant for one measure during acquisition (average
distance to goal), CREBcomp animals were severely impaired in both acquisition and quadrant
time (Fig. 2).
THIGMOTAXIS IS DEPENDENT ON GENE DOSAGE
OF CREB AND CORRELATES WITH LEARNING
PERFORMANCE AND SPATIAL RETENTION
IN THE WATER MAZE

Spatial learning deficits are commonly defined
as lack of spatial preference toward an invisible

&
279

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

Figure 1: Subtle deficits in CREBcomp but not in CREB␣⌬ mice in the water maze task with six trials per day and a 1-hr
intertrial interval. (A) The three groups show different aquisition of the task (path averaged over blocks of two trials,
P < 0.027). CREBcomp mice have longer paths than wild types (P < 0.05), whereas CREB␣⌬ mice are indistinguishable.
(B) The three groups are not significantly different with respect to the percent of time spent within 22 cm of the pool wall.
(A, B) (䊊) Wild type; (䊉) CREB␣⌬; (䊏) CREBcomp. (C) Comparison of percent time spent in the trained vs. adjacent left
and right quadrants during the probe trial (first 60 sec of the first reversal trial). Neither CREB␣⌬ nor CREBcomp mice differ
from wild types with respect to their clear preference for the trained quadrant. (D) Comparison of number of crossings over
the trained goal vs. left and right control annulus during the probe trial (first 60 sec of the first reversal trial). (C, D) (Open
box) Wild type; (light hatching) CREB␣⌬; (dark hatching) CREBcomp. CREB␣⌬ have the same preference for the trained
annulus as wild types. CREBcomp mice show a weaker preference for the trained annulus than wild types (P < 0.038).

goal position. However, spatial learning can take
place by using alternative strategies without goal
preferences, such as circular search paths. This
strategy is often associated with, and probably derived from, thigmotaxis (swimming along the walls
of the pool), the instinctive approaching of the
walls most prevalent during the first trials of water
maze learning (Lipp and Wolfer 1998). It has been
shown that performance variations in swimming
navigation learning of normal and transgenic mice
are dependent on three independent factors: spatial memory, thigmotaxis, and swimming speed.
An increase or persistence in thigmotaxis may
sometimes be confounded with memory deficits

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

(Lipp and Wolfer 1998). Analyzing thigmotactic behavior (time spent near wall, percent swimming
parallel to wall, number of wall contacts; cf. Table
1 and Fig. 1B) in the three groups demonstrated—
owing to the large variabilities of the scores—only
borderline effects for the intense training protocol
(parallel to wall swimming P < 0.048). However,
CREBcomp mice showed higher levels of thigmotaxis throughout aquisition as well as during reversal learning (Fig. 1B). Although no significant genotype effect was found for the number of wall contacts, this variable showed a highly significant
interaction between genotype and trial blocks, indicating a persisting tendency of CREBcomp mice

&
280

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

Figure 2: Larger and partially gradual deficits of CREB␣⌬ and CREBcomp mutants in the water maze task with two trials
per day and a 1-min intertrial interval. (A) The three groups show aquisition of the task ranked according to gene dosage
(path averaged over blocks of two trials, P < 0.017). CREBcomp mice have longer paths than wild types (P < 0.01), but
CREB␣⌬ mice are statistically indistinguishable from wild types. (B) The three groups differ with respect to the percent of
time spent within 22 cm of the pool wall (P < 0.002). CREBcomp mice (P < 0.0015) as well as CREB␣⌬ (P < 0.05) spend
more time next to the wall than wild types. (C) Comparison of percent time spent in the trained vs. adjacent left and right
quadrants during the 60 sec probe trial. CREB␣⌬ mice show statistically the same preference for the trained quadrants as
wild types. Unlike wild types, CREBcomp mice do not show a preference for the trained quadrant (P < 0.01). (D)
Comparison of number of crossings over the trained goal vs. left and right control annulus during the probe trial. CREB␣⌬
have the same preference for the trained annulus as wild types. CREBcomp mice show overall fewer annulus crossings
than wild types (P < 0.015) but are indistinguishable with respect to preference for the trained annulus. (See Fig. 1 for
symbols.)

(P < 0.023). Because ANOVA had shown almost no
significant differences in thigmotaxis under the intense training schedule, we also compared statistically the effects of genotype and training schedule
on thigmotaxis. This could be done because the
average score from both schedules was based on
almost the same number of trials and because the
score was not dependent on the different time
schedules of the two protocols. A two-way ANOVA
(genotype by schedule) revealed a highly significant genotype effect across both schedules
(P < 0.0001), the CREBcomp mice being most thig-

to make wall contacts during ongoing training. The
thigmotactic tendencies of CREB mutant mice
were clearly more evident under the less intense
training schedule (Fig. 2B). ANOVA revealed highly
significant genotype effects for swimming parallel
to wall (P < 0.0015) and for time spent near the
wall (P < 0.002). Pairwise comparisons of genotypes showed significant differences between wildtype and CREBcomp mice for swimming parallel to
the wall (P < 0.0017), as well as for time spent near
the wall between wild-type and CREBcomp animals (P < 0.0015) and wild-type and CREB␣⌬ mice

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
281

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

motactic in both conditions, and a moderate yet
significant increase from an average of 30% thigmotactic swimming time to 36% under the less intense training schedule (P = 0.045). The lack of a
significant interaction between the two factors indicates that the less intense training protocol
merely accentuated the thigmotactic tendencies of
mutant mice already present in the other protocol.
Finally, a factor analysis using six variables comparable across the two water maze protocols showed
that the behavior of the mice could be explained
by three independent factors: thigmotaxis, speed
and spatial memory (Table 2). This agrees completely with factor analyses conducted with large
numbers of mice (Lipp and Wolfer 1998). Unlike
conventional ANOVA, such factor analyses ‘‘subtract’’ statistically the amount of spatial memory
score impairments attributable to thigmotaxis. The
resulting factor, ‘‘spatial memory’’ (factor 3 in
Table 2), indicates thus the proportion of variability in the spatial memory scores that is not accounted for by the factors thigmotaxis and speed.
By entering the genotype in coded form (scoring
CREBcomp as −1, CREB␣⌬ as 0, and wild-type
mice as 1), it is possible to check whether one of
the factors is preferentially associated with genotype differences. Table 2 demonstrates that the
variable genotype was associated strongly and only
with the factor thigmotaxis but not with the spatial
memory factor. This result reflects that a minority
of CREBcomp mice showed good probe trial
scores, and it implies that the impairment of spatial
memory in the probe trials of CREBcomp mice as
revealed by ANOVA was most likely owing to a
majority of mice with increased thigmotactic behavior.
Table 2:

RETENTION OF FREEZING AFTER FEAR CONDITIONING IS
DEPENDENT ON GENE DOSAGE

When tested for contextual as well as cued
fear conditioning, F1 hybrid wild-type mice revealed significantly less freezing than pure
C57BL/6 mice and the F2 progeny from C57BL/6
and 129Svev (Fig. 3A). The latter two strains,
which were used as independent controls for the
test, demonstrated freezing scores as expected
from the literature (Owen et al. 1997). Pure
C57BL/6 and F2 progeny from C57BL/6 and
129Svev did not show significant differences in
freezing in the contextual and the cued test version. Compared with the F1 hybrid wild types—
similar to the water maze experiments—we observed for both contextual and cued long-term conditioning (24-hr test) a similarly ranked deficit in
freezing retention in CREB mutants as in the water
maze, CREB␣⌬ mice being intermediate between
wild-type and CREBcomp animals (Fig. 3A).
CREB␣⌬ mice exhibited mild deficits in both contextual and cued learning, which were statistically
not significant. In contrast, CREBcomp mice
showed severe and statistically highly significant
deficits when compared with their wild-type littermates (P < 0.001 for both contextual and cued
conditioning). To investigate whether the deficits
observed were restricted to long-term retention of
freezing or whether short-term learning was also
affected, we performed additional experiments
and tested CREB wild-type, CREB␣⌬, and CREBcomp mice at 0.5 hr after training. In this shortterm version of the test, however, no significant
differences were observed between the three
groups.

Factor analysis of intercorrelated variables in the water maze
Factor

Variables
Time near wall (%)
Search time in goal quadrant (%)
Average distance to goal
Swimming speed
Time in old target quadrant (%)
Crossings over old target
Genotype (wild type = 1, CREBcomp = −1)
Variation explained (n = 84).

1

2

3

−0.84
0.71
−0.88
−0.03
0.20
0.23
0.73

−0.12
−0.05
−0.07
0.97
−0.18
0.14
−0.23

−0.28
0.43
−0.40
−0.03
0.86
0.83
−0.05

50%

15%

14%

(Bold print) Factor scores above 0.40 are conventionally considered as meaningful.

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
282

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

Figure 3: Fear conditioning studies
demonstrate gene dosage-dependent
LTM deficits in CREB mutant mice. (A) In
the 24-hr version of the test, one-way
ANOVAs exhibit a significant difference
between the five groups investigated in
both contextual (dark-shaded bars) and
cued (light-shaded bars) form of the
test [context: F(4,69) = 20.57, P < 0.001;
cued: F(4,69) = 20.17, P < 0.001]. C57BL/
6xFVB/N F1 hybrid wild types perform
significantly worse than C57BL/6 or
C57BL/6x129Svev wild types. Compared with their F1 hybrid wild-type littermates, CREB␣⌬ mice show mild but
statistically not significant deficits. CREBcomp mice demonstrate severe and statistically highly significant deficits compared with their wild-type littermates
(context and cued P < 0.001, respectively). (B) In the 0.5-hr version of the test,
one-way ANOVAs do not exhibit significant differences between the three groups
(context: F(2,33) = 0.344, P = 0.71; cued:
F(2,33) = 0.287, P = 0.75).

and no significant difference was found (P = 0.67).
When wild-type mice were compared to CREBcomp, again no difference was observed between
the two groups (Fig. 4B). Wild-type mice consumed 80.5 ± 6.4 % cued food (of food eaten totally); CREBcomp mutants, 81.5 ± 5.5 % (P = 0.95).
Naive mice (without scented food demonstration)
did not show a preference for either of the two
scented foods used in these experiments (data
not shown). In summary, wild-type, CREB␣⌬, and
CREBcomp mice showed intact long-term preference in this test with an equal level of performance.

In summary, CREBcomp but not CREB␣⌬ exhibited significant deficits in long-term but not
short-term retention of freezing when compared
with their wild-type littermates. It has to be
pointed out, however, that the wild-type mice in
the F1 hybrid background per se showed less
freezing when compared with wild-type mice of
other genetic backgrounds (C57BL/6, C57BL/
6x129Svev).

CREB MUTANTS DO NOT SHOW DEFICITS
IN THE SOCIAL TRANSMISSION OF FOOD
PREFERENCE TASK

CREB MUTANTS EXHIBIT NORMAL LTP
IN HIPPOCAMPAL CA1 AND DENTATE
GYRUS NEURONS

When tested 24 hr after the training session, all
three groups (wild type, CREB␣⌬, CREBcomp)
showed a significant preference for the cued food
compared with the noncued food (P < 0.001 for all
groups; Fig. 4). The average ratio of the weight of
the cued food eaten and the weight of food eaten
totally was compared between wild-type mice
(75.5 ± 7.2%) and CREB␣⌬ mutants (79 ± 7.2%),

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

In the electrophysiological experiments conducted to investigate whether LTP as one form of
synaptic plasticity is altered in the mutant animals,
no significant differences could be detected when
compared with wild-type controls (Fig. 5). This

&
283

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

Discussion
In the present study, CREB mutant mice were
impaired in water maze learning and fear conditioning but devoid of any deficits in the social
transmission of food preference task and in LTP
studies. The extent of impairment parallels the
CREB gene dosage of the two CREB mutant strains
investigated, that is, only CREBcomp mice that possess one hypomorphic CREB␣⌬ and one CREBnull
allele exhibited statistically significant deficits. In
our study, CREB␣⌬ mice (with two ␣⌬ alleles)
were mildly impaired, showing only in a few parameters weak statistical significance. This contrasts with previous studies (Bourtchuladze et al.
1994; Kogan et al. 1996) that reported major deficits for CREB␣⌬ mice in all paradigms tested. The
discrepancy might be attributed to the different
genetic background of the animals.

INFLUENCE OF CREB ON LTM MAY DEPEND
ON GENETIC BACKGROUND AND HYBRID VIGOR

The experiments of the present study are in
accordance with a recommendation of the Banbury conference to use F1 hybrids, in our case an
intercross between C57BL/6 and FVB/N carrying
the backcrossed CREB mutations in the sixth or
seventh generation. The previous experiments
with CREB␣⌬ mice were conducted in undefined
(Bourtchuladze et al. 1994) as well as F2 or F3 progeny from C57BL/6 and 129/SVJ (Kogan et al.
1996). The present study could not reproduce the
observation of LTM deficits and prevention of early
LTP made in CREB␣⌬ mice earlier (Bourtchuladze
et al. 1994; Kogan et al. 1996). We suggest that
these results could be explained by the different
genetic background and hybrid vigor (see below),
because all other experimental conditions were as
close as possible to those reported earlier. One
cannot exclude that CREB mutants with the background used in the earlier studies suffered from
mild developmental deficits (Bourtchuladze et al.
1994; Kogan et al. 1996). This might explain why
already an early phase of LTP, that is, the protein
synthesis independent stage, was impaired. Moreover, an increased incidence of developmental
CNS defects has been reported for the 129/Sv
background, for example, dysplasia of the corpus
callosum (Lipp and Wahlsten 1992; Lipp et al., this
issue). In addition to CREB␣⌬, we have investigated CREBcomp animals. These mice exhibited a
decreased performance in water maze and fear

Figure 4: CREB mutants show intact LTM in the social
transmission of food preference task. (A,B) The social
transmission of food preference tests demonstrates a
clear preference for the trained food in all groups
(P < 0.001 for all genotypes). (Dark-shaded bars) Cued;
(light-shaded bars) noncued. No significant difference is
found between the groups (A: P = 0.67; B: P = 0.95).

holds true for both the initial size of LTP and its
maintenance assessed by the percentage of potentiation 2 hr after induction. In the CA1 region, the
weak and the strong tetanization protocol evoked
LTP of comparable size. Although the initial magnitude of CA1 LTP was slightly larger in wild-type
animals, the difference to the two strains of mutants was not statistically distinguishable. Similarly,
the induction of LTP in the dentate gyrus was unchanged in CREB␣⌬ and CREBcomp mice when
compared with wild type. When the maintenance
of CA1 LTP was evaluated 2 hr post-tetanus, neither the potentiation obtained after weak tetanization nor the potentiation induced by the strong
protocol were different between CREB-deficient
animals and their wild-type controls. The potentiation of CREBcomp mice in the dentate gyrus
tended to be reduced, but this difference was not
statistically significant.

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
284

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

Figure 5: Hippocampal LTP in the CA1 region and in
the dentate gyrus is unchanged in CREB mutant mice.
LTP could be induced and maintained in all groups investigated, that is, in wild-type (䊊), CREB␣⌬ (䊉), and
CREBcomp (䊏) mice, irrespective of whether a single
weak (A) or a repeated strong tetanization protocol (B,C)
was applied. Statistical significant differences between
the groups can be neither detected in the initial magnitude of potentiation nor in the maintanance (sample size
for wild-type, CREB␣⌬, and CREBcomp animals: weak
tetanus CA1, n = 9, n = 5, n = 5, respectively; strong
tetanus CA1: n = 9, n = 9, n = 5; strong tetanus dentate
gyrus, n = 9, n = 9, n = 7). In all CA1 experiments, potentials from a second independent, nontetanized control input were recorded. No influence on baseline potentials was observed during the recorded period.

to reach statistical significance. However, regular
performance of F1 hybrid wild types and both mutant strains in the social transmission of food preference test as well as no changes in LTP studies
indicates that mice in the C57BL/6xFVB/N background are not generally compromised for
memory testing. The F1 crosses used here showed
the behavioral hybrid vigor that can be expected
from crosses between near inbred lines. Thus, the
F1 hybrid wild-type mice used in the water maze
learned equally or better than a large sample of
∼600 F2 wild-type controls and showed practically
no floating (data not shown). Taken together, it
appears that hybrid vigor has reduced the impact
of CREB␣⌬ in behavioral and physiological tests,
similarly as it has been demonstrated for pharmacological manipulations of water maze learning in
the strains C57BL/6, DBA, and their F1 hybrids (Upchurch et al. 1988). On the other hand, the persistence of deficits in the CREBcomp hybrids implies
that the consequences of the compound mutation
are robust and reliable. Likewise, the reduction of
morphine abstinence in CREB␣⌬ mice is preserved
when examined in the F1 hybrid C57BL/6xFVB/N
background (Maldonado et al. 1996; R. Maldonado,
P. Gass, and G. Schütz, unpubl.).
conditioning experiments but revealed normal
learning in the social transmission of food preference task, as well as intact LTP. In the present
study, fear conditioning experiments with wildtype F1 hybrids (C57BL/6xFVB/N) demonstrated
less freezing than wild-type mice of other genetic
backgrounds, that is, pure C57BL/6 or C57BL/
6x129/Sv (Fig. 3). Thus, given the reduced freezing of the wild-type animals, mild deficits in the
mutants (e.g., in CREB␣⌬) may have been too small

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

DEFICITS IN WATER MAZE AND FEAR
CONDITIONING TASKS DEPEND ON GENE DOSAGE

In addition to differences in the genetic background and hybrid vigor, a gene dosage effect
could account for the changes obtained in the behavioral tests. A stepwise reduction in CREB gene
dosage was accompanied by an increasing severeness of behavioral deficits. Thus, in the water maze

&
285

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

task as well as in contextual and cued fear conditioning, CREB␣⌬ mice exhibited only a trend to an
impaired performance, but CREBcomp mice displayed severe and statistically highly significant
deficits (Figs. 2 and 3). These findings are in line
with recent studies in Drosophila and Aplysia
demonstrating that the ratio of CREB activators and
CREB suppressor proteins is crucial for the development of LTM (Yin et al. 1994, 1995; Bartsch et al.
1995). Both transgenic manipulations in Drosophila leading to an increased activator/suppressor ratio and the application of antibodies to a
CREB suppressor protein in Aplysia resulted in enhanced LTM formation and long-term facilitation,
respectively (Yin et al. 1994, 1995; Bartsch et al.
1995). Similar to a previous study by Kogan et al.
(1996), we observed a marked improvement of
both CREB mutant strains in the water maze performance when we used a protocol with increased
training intensity and frequency. In contrast to earlier studies, however, only CREBcomp mice displayed a clear deterioration of learning, whereas
CREB␣⌬ mice were practically indistinguishable
from wild-type controls (Bourtchuladze et al. 1994;
Kogan et al. 1996). Such discrepancies probably
reflect differences in genetic background and hybrid vigor (see above).
It appears likely that the distinct deficits of the
CREBcomp mice in swimming navigation are the
result of a reduction of CREB protein below a critical threshold. It is not clear, however, whether the
deterioration in learning scores and spatial retention is caused by a deficit in the molecular mechanisms of spatial memory or by a defect in some
other form of plasticity. Our data provide evidence
that thigmotaxis in the water maze, which at the
beginning of training is found in all genotypes, is
the main predictor of poor acquisition and low
probe trial scores. A high number of CREBcomp
mice showed persistent thigmotaxis throughout
training, whereas a minority learned well and
showed decent probe trial scores. This indicates an
ability to develop spatial memory in the presence
of the CREBcomp mutation. Theoretically, increased thigmotactic swimming could also result
from an impaired spatial memory. However, the
results of the factor analysis showing no correlations between genotype and a spatial memory factor do not support this notion (Table 2). In addition, the intense training schedule included a platform reversal. The very pronounced increase in
escape time after the platform reversal indicates
that most CREBcomp mice had learned the plat-

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

form position, possibly by means of alternative
search strategies (Fig. 1A). Second, it indicates a
problem of some of these CREBcomp mice in rapid
switching to a search strategy for a new platform
location. Taking into account the lack of differences in synaptic plasticity as measured by LTP,
these observations suggest that mice with low levels of CREB were suffering from impaired behavioral flexibility, being unable to switch to more
efficient search strategies. In support of this notion, CREBcomp mice showed also increased and
persisting levels of thigmotaxis in the open field,
despite a high locomotor activity (data not shown).
Taken together, the data suggest that CREB in
mammals could also play a more general role in
noncognitive neural adaptivity.
CREBcomp mutants showed significantly reduced freezing to both auditory and contextual
cues as compared with both CREB␣⌬ and CREB
wild-type controls. This parallels the finding in the
water maze and strongly suggests a gene dosage
effect. The freezing deficit of CREBcomp mice primarily in the 24-hr test but not in the 0.5-hr test is
clearly consistent with a role of CREB in LTM, most
likely in the amygdala and hippocampus. However,
freezing also depends on the spontaneous activity
level of the mice. Active mice such as F1 hybrids
show lower levels of freezing, but this may not
necessarily represent an indicator of impaired
memory. Thus, as in swimming navigation and
open field, it cannot be excluded that CREBcomp
mice have also difficulties in long-term adaptation
and control of intrinsic behaviors interfering with
the learned appropriate response (freezing). This
would again also imply cellular mechanisms more
related to habituation and adaptation than to specific memory processes and their related neuronal
circuitries.
CONCLUSIONS

The present study demonstrates gene dosagedependent learning deficits in mice with hypomorphic CREB alleles. Compared with earlier studies of
CREB␣⌬ mice in a different genetic background,
deficits observed in CREB␣⌬ mice were mild (water maze, fear conditioning) or absent (social transmission of food preference, LTP), most likely owing to hybrid vigor resulting from the use of F1
hybrids. Whereas CREB seems to play a unique role
in memory in Aplysia and Drosophila, more complex pathways may exist in mammals, which may
compensate for the reduced levels of CREB in the

&
286

M

E

M

O

R

Y

CREB AND MEMORY

Bourtchuladze, R., B. Frenguelli, J. Blendy, D. Cioffi, G.
Schütz, and A.J. Silva. 1994. Deficient long-term memory in
mice with a targeted mutation of the cAMP responsive
element binding (CREB) protein. Cell 79: 59–68.

CNS. One compensatory mechanism observed in
mice with a loss of the CREB ␣ and ⌬ isoforms is
the up-regulation of the CREB ␤ isoform (Blendy et
al. 1996). Further reduction of gene dosage was
achieved by generating CREBcomp mice with only
one intact ␤-allele. In addition, up-regulation of
CREM, which is also expressed in the nervous system, may compensate for the reduced levels of
CREB activity (Hummler et al. 1994; Blendy et al.
1996). Further experiments are required to define
the function of CREB and related proteins in vertebrate synaptic plasticity and memory formation.
Comparative analysis of the reliable phenotype of
the CREBcomp F1 hybrids with (upcoming) conditional and tissue-specific null mutations of the
CREB gene will allow further characterization of
the role of CREB in learning and memory.

Dash, P.K., B. Hochner, and E.R. Kandel. 1990. Injection of
the cAMP response element into the nucleus of Aplysia
sensory neurons blocks long-term faciliation. Nature
345: 718–721.
Frank, D.A. and M.E. Greenberg. 1994. CREB: A mediator of
long-term memory from mollusks to mammals. Cell 79: 5–8.
Frey, U. and R.G.M. Morris. 1997. Synaptic tagging and
long-term potentiation. Nature 385: 533–536.
Frey, U., M. Krug, K.G. Reymann, and H. Matthies. 1988.
Anisomycin, an inhibitor of protein synthesis, blocks late
phases of LTP phenomena in the hippocampal CA1 region in
vitro. Brain Res. 452: 57–65.
Frey, U., M. Müller, and D. Kuhl. 1996. A different form of
long-lasting potentiation revealed in tissue plasminogen
activator mutant mice. J. Neurosci. 16: 2057–2063.

Acknowledgments
We are indebted to Dr. Richard G.M. Morris for
critically reading the manuscript. We wish to acknowledge
the excellent technical assistance of Heike Glaser, Sabine
Hartmann, Diana Koch, Rosmarie Lang, Stefanie Ridder, and
Christiane Zacher. We extend our thanks to Dr. Lutz Edler for
help with the statistical analysis. This work was supported by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to P.G. and G.S. (ZI
110/22-1; UN 34/19-1) as well as to U.F. (FR 1034/4-1), by
the ‘‘Volkswagen-Stiftung’’ to G.S., by the Land
Sachsen-Anhalt to U.F. (2521A/0086H), by the Swiss
National Foundation for Scientific Research to H.P.L.
(31-466691.96) and to D.P.W. (31-42347.94), and by the
Human Frontier Science Program to H.P.L.
The publication costs of this article were defrayed in
part by payment of page charges. This article must therefore
be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in accordance with 18
USC section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.

Gerlai, R. 1996. Gene-targeting studies of mammalian
behavior: Is it the mutation or the background genotype?
Trends Neurosci. 19: 177–181.
Giese, K.P., N.B. Fedorov, R.K. Filipkowski, and A.J. Silva.
1998. Autophosphorylation at Thr286 of the ␣
calcium-calmodulin kinase II in LTP and learning. Science
279: 870–873.
Guzowski, J.F. and J.L. McGaugh. 1997. Antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide-mediated disruption of hippocampal
cAMP response element binding protein levels impairs
consolidation of memory for watermaze training. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 94: 2693–2698.
Hsiao, K., P. Chapman, S. Nilsen, C. Eckman, Y. Harigaya, S.
Younkin, F. Yang, and G. Cole. 1996. Correlative memory
deficits, A␤ elevation, and amyloid plaques in transgenic
mice. Science 274: 99–102.

References
Bailey, C.H., D. Bartsch, and E.R. Kandel. 1996. Toward a
molecular definition of long-term memory storage. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 93: 13445–13452.

Hummler, E., T.J. Cole, J.A. Blendy, R. Ganss, A. Aguzzi, W.
Schmid, F. Beermann, and G. Schütz. 1994. Targeted
mutation of the cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) gene: Compensation within the CREB/ATF family of
transcription factors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 91: 5647–5651.

Banbury Conference on Genetic Background in Mice. 1997.
Mutant mice and neuroscience: Recommendations
concerning genetic background. Neuron 19: 755–759.
Bartsch, D., M. Ghirardi, P.A. Skehel, K.A. Karl, S.P. Herder,
M. Chen, C.H. Bailey, and E.R. Kandel. 1995. Aplysia CREB2
represses long-term facilitation: Relief of repression converts
transient facilitation into long-term functional and structural
change. Cell 83: 979–992.

Kogan, J.H., P.W. Frankland, J.A. Blendy, J. Coblentz, Z.
Marowitz, G. Schütz, and A.J. Silva. 1996. Spaced training
induces normal long-term memory in CREB mutant mice.
Curr. Biol. 7: 1–11.
Lathe, R. 1996. Mice, gene targeting and behaviour: More
than just genetic background. TINS 19: 183–186.

Blendy, J.A., K.H. Kaestner, W. Schmid, P. Gass, and G.
Schütz. 1996. Targeting of the CREB gene leads to
upregulation of a novel CREB mRNA isoform. EMBO J.
15: 1098–1106.

Lipp, H.P. and D. Wahlsten. 1992. Abscence of the corpus
callosum. In Genetically defined animal models of
neurobehavioural dysfunctions (ed. P. Driscall), pp. 217–252.
Birkhäuser, Boston, MA.

Bliss, T.V. and G.L. Collingridge. 1993. A synaptic model of
memory: Long-term potentiation. Nature 361: 31–39.

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
287

M

E

M

O

R

Y

Gass et al.

Lipp, H.P. and D.P. Wolfer. 1998. Genetically modified mice
and cognition. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8: 272–280.
Lipp, H.H., C. Buechel, R. Waanders, S. Sibold-Savina, F.
Magara, and D.P. Wolfer 1998. Swimming navigation
learning, size variations, and agenesis of the corpus callosum
in mice: No major effects but subtle and strain specific
influences on spatial memory within 129 strains. Learn. &
Mem. (this issue).
Maldonado, R., J.A. Blendy, E. Tzavara, P. Gass, B.P. Roques,
J. Hanoune, and G. Schütz. 1996. Reduction of morphine
abstinence in mice with a mutation in the CREB gene.
Science 273: 657–659.
Morris, R.G.M., P. Garrud, J.N.P. Rawlins, and J. O’Keefe.
1982. Place navigation impaired in rats with hippocampal
lesions. Nature 297: 681–683.
Owen, E.H., S.F. Logue, D.L. Rasmussen, and J.M. Wehner.
1997. Assessment of learning by the Morris water task and
fear conditioning in inbred mouse strains and F1 hybrids:
Implications of genetic background for single gene mutations
and quantitative trait loci analyses. Neurosci. 80: 1087–1099.
Rudolph, D., A. Tafuri, P. Gass, G.J. Hämmerling, B. Arnold,
and G. Schütz. 1998. Impaired fetal T-cell development and
perinatal lethality in mice lacking the cAMP response
element binding protein (CREB). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
95: 4481–4486.
Upchurch, M., J.I. Pounder, and J.M. Wehner. 1988.
Heterosis and resistance to DFP effects on spatial learning in
C57BL x DBA hybrids. Brain Res. Bull. 21: 499–503.
Wolfer, D.P., U. Müller, M. Stagliar, and H.P. Lipp. 1997.
Assessing the effects of the 129/Sv genetic background on
swimming navigation learning in transgenic mutant: A study
using mice with a modified beta-amyloid precursor protein
gene. Brain Res. 771: 1–13.
Yin, J.C.P., J.S. Wallach, M. Del Vecchio, E.L. Wilder, H.
Zhou, W.G. Quinn, and T. Tully. 1994. Induction of a
dominant negative CREB transgene specifically blocks
long-term memory in drosophila. Cell 79: 49–58.
Yin, J.C.P., M. Del Vecchio, H. Zhou, and T. Tully. 1995.
CREB as a memory modulator: Induced expression of a
dCREB2 activator isoform enhances long-term memory in
drosophila. Cell 81: 107–115.

Received March 11, 1998; accepted in revised form July 17,
1998.

L

E

A

R

N

I

N

G

&
288

M

E

M

O

R

Y

