REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 20 November 2013
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2013.00040

MOLECULAR NEUROSCIENCE

RISC in PD: the impact of microRNAs in Parkinson’s disease
cellular and molecular pathogenesis
Sabrina M. Heman-Ackah 1,2 , Martina Hallegger 1 , Mahendra S. Rao 2 and Matthew J. A. Wood 1*
1
2

Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Center for Regenerative Medicine, US National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA

Edited by:
Hermona Soreq, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Israel
Reviewed by:
Hermona Soreq, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Israel
Darren J. Moore, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Switzerland
*Correspondence:
Matthew J. A. Wood, Department of
Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics,
University of Oxford, Le Gros Clark
Building, South Parks Road, Oxford
OX1 3QX, UK
e-mail: matthew.wood@
dpag.ox.ac.uk

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a debilitating neurodegenerative disease characterized primarily
by the selective death of dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta
of the midbrain. Although several genetic forms of PD have been identified, the precise
molecular mechanisms underlying DA neuron loss in PD remain elusive. In recent years,
microRNAs (miRNAs) have been recognized as potent post-transcriptional regulators of
gene expression with fundamental roles in numerous biological processes. Although
their role in PD pathogenesis is still a very active area of investigation, several seminal
studies have contributed significantly to our understanding of the roles these small
non-coding RNAs play in the disease process. Among these are studies which have
demonstrated specific miRNAs that target and down-regulate the expression of PD-related
genes as well as those demonstrating a reciprocal relationship in which PD-related genes
act to regulate miRNA processing machinery. Concurrently, a wealth of knowledge has
become available regarding the molecular mechanisms that unify the underlying etiology
of genetic and sporadic PD pathogenesis, including dysregulated protein quality control
by the ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy pathway, activation of programmed
cell death, mitochondrial damage and aberrant DA neurodevelopment and maintenance.
Following a discussion of the interactions between PD-related genes and miRNAs, this
review highlights those studies which have elucidated the roles of these pathways in PD
pathogenesis. We highlight the potential of miRNAs to serve a critical regulatory role in
the implicated disease pathways, given their capacity to modulate the expression of entire
families of related genes. Although few studies have directly linked miRNA regulation of
these pathways to PD, a strong foundation for investigation has been laid and this area
holds promise to reveal novel therapeutic targets for PD.
Keywords: Parkinson’s disease, microRNA (miRNA), ubiquitin-proteasome system, autophagy, apoptosis,
mitochondria, dopaminergic neurons, iPS cells

INTRODUCTION
PARKINSON’S DISEASE

PD is a progressive neurodegenerative disease which manifests
as a debilitating movement disorder with late cognitive sequelae. Pathologically, PD is characterized by the selective loss of
DA neurons in the midbrain substantia nigra pars compacta with
four clinical hallmarks resulting from the loss of dopamine signaling in the striatum. These four hallmarks, which clinically define
Parkinsonism, are pill-rolling tremor, cogwheel rigidity, bradykinesia/akinesia and postural instability (Savitt et al., 2006). With
progression of the disease, the neurodegenerative process spreads
to involve other brain regions. Most notably, the forebrain is
commonly affected in late PD leading to cognitive decline and
dementia (Jellinger, 2012). Despite pharmacologic therapy with
dopamine replacement (Cotzias, 1968; Antonini and Cilia, 2009),
and recent advances in surgical treatment with deep brain stimulation (Pereira and Aziz, 2006; Pereira et al., 2007; Farris and
Giroux, 2011), there remains a void in understanding and inhibiting the underlying progressive neurodegeneration that defines
PD. It has thus become a significant research focus of recent years

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

to examine the molecular mediators underlying this process with
the objective of translating this understanding to the development
of new therapeutic approaches.
In recent years, researchers have identified genetic mutations which cause approximately 10% of PD cases (Klein and
Westenberger, 2012). Investigations into the precise link between
genetic mutation and disease, and the etiology of the 90% of
sporadic PD cases, have led to the identification of molecular
pathways that culminate in initial DA neuron injury and the
resulting DA neuron death and progressive neurodegeneration.
The primary pathways which have been implicated as mediators of the degenerative process are the protein quality control
pathways, the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and autophagy
pathway, as well as apoptosis, mitochondrial quality control, and
DA differentiation and maintenance; the proposed role of each of
these pathways in PD pathogenesis is described in detail below.
Defects in these pathways may explain the underlying etiology of
both genetic and sporadic PD pathogenesis. Thus, great interest
has developed in understanding mechanisms of endogenous regulation of these pathways. Toward this end, the characterization

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 1

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

of miRNA function in PD pathogenesis has become of particular interest and the potential of these molecules to serve as
pathway modifiers for therapeutic intervention in PD is increasingly appreciated.
miRNA BIOGENESIS AND FUNCTION

miRNAs are endogenous regulators of gene expression. These
small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) can be transcribed by RNA
polymerase II (RNA Pol II) from two primary genomic loci:
miRNA genes and intronic sequences. In the canonical biogenesis pathway (Figure 1A), transcription from miRNA genes
yields pri-miRNAs which are processed in the nucleus by
the Drosha/DGCR8 microprocessor complex to produce premiRNAs. The processed pre-miRNAs are then exported to the
cytoplasm by Exportin-5, where they are further cleaved by the
RNase III enzyme Dicer to produce a mature miRNA duplex.
The mature guide strand is 20–22 nucleotides in length and associates with Argonaute proteins, AGO 1–4, to form a functional
RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). The anti-sense strand,
denoted by miRNA∗, was previously thought to be degraded;
recent evidence suggests that some of these may have biological
activity. The mature miRNA is then responsible for aligning
the RISC to target mRNA by binding at complementary seed
sequences in the 3 UTR. This association of target mRNA with
the miRNA-containing RISC most commonly results in downregulation of gene expression by translational repression and
recruitment of protein complexes causing deadenylation and
degradation of target mRNA. Conversely, miRNAs have also been
shown to stabilize transcripts under certain cellular conditions
(Melton et al., 2010).
The canonical pathway of miRNA biogenesis is also referred
to as Drosha-dependent/Dicer-dependent miRNA biogenesis.
In the much rarer, non-canonical Drosha-dependent/Dicerindependent miRNA biogenesis pathway, the exported premiRNA is processed by AGO2 in the cytoplasm to produce the
mature guide strand (Figure 1B). miRNAs generated by another
non-canonical pathway, termed Drosha-independent/Dicerdependent miRNA biogenesis, are referred to as mirtrons
(Figure 1C). In this pathway, mirtrons are spliced from the
intronic sequences of transcribed genes, forming a lariat structure
which is de-branched to form the pre-miRNA hairpin structure.
After export from the nucleus, mirtrons function similarly to
miRNA generated via the canonical pathway. Further discussion
of miRNA biogenesis pathways can be found in detailed reviews
on this topic (Bartel, 2009; Ameres and Zamore, 2013).
Our understanding of the role ncRNAs play in development
and disease has expanded rapidly over the last decade. Recent
insights are providing evidence that other classes of ncRNAs
may contribute to transcriptome alterations in PD. For a more
detailed discussion on the roles of long ncRNAs and small vault
RNAs in PD, the reader is referred to the following references
(Minones-Moyano et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2013). miRNAs in particular have been identified as critical regulators of gene expression in a number of normal biological and pathophysiological
processes. miRNA dysregulation has been convincingly linked
to a number of neurodegenerative diseases. For a discussion of
the role miRNAs play in Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

disease, the reader is referred to the enclosed references (Delay
et al., 2012; Sinha et al., 2012). Recently discovered relationships between PD-related genes and miRNAs and consideration
of miRNA regulation of cellular and molecular pathways that
have been implicated in PD pathogenesis are explored further in
this review.
miRNA-BASED THERAPEUTICS

A better understanding of the role miRNAs play in the cellular
and molecular pathogenesis of PD will undoubtedly contribute
to the development of novel miRNA-based therapies. It is therefore, imperative to make a number of important considerations
in moving miRNAs from molecular targets to viable therapeutics. First, because of their ability to modulate the expression of
families of related genes that participate in common cellular and
molecular pathways, miRNAs hold great potential to restore balance to dysregulated pathways at the onset and very early stages of
PD (Ouellet et al., 2006). However, the ability to apply a miRNAbased therapy within this critical time period is currently limited
by an inability to accurately diagnose PD at these early stages
(Akhtar and Stern, 2012). Thus, the detection of biomarkers,
development of sensitive imaging techniques, and discovery of
clinical criteria that can discern PD in these early stages will be
critical for the development of miRNA-based therapeutics with
disease-altering potential (Akhtar and Stern, 2012). Additionally,
given the mechanism of action of RNAi-based therapies, it is
important to consider off-target effects resulting from transcriptional and translational repression of unintended miRNA targets
(Rao et al., 2009). In the development of miRNA-based therapies
for PD, it is also necessary to consider the route of delivery to
achieve therapeutic levels of the miRNA in the brain (Boudreau
et al., 2011). Although targeted delivery of small RNAs to the
brain has presented a formidable challenge in the past, recent evidence suggests that exosomes may be used to deliver exogenous
cargo, including nucleic acids, to the brain, providing a novel
means of overcoming this current limitation to the translation
of miRNA-based therapies (Alvarez-Erviti et al., 2011). Finally,
an important limitation to the testing of miRNA therapeutics
is the lack of an animal model that recapitulates key features
of PD pathology (Beal, 2010). Although animal models have
been developed that display nigostriatal degeneration, an animal model that demonstrates Lewy body pathology, a key feature
of human Parkinsonism, remains to be discovered. This underscores a potential difference between the cellular and molecular
mechanisms of Parkinson’s symptomatology in existing models
compared to that in humans, presenting a challenge for the accurate detection and application of miRNAs that would modulate
these pathways for therapeutic benefit. Despite these limitations,
it has been demonstrated that an integrated analysis of PD mouse
models, existing human cell culture models and novel human
iPSC-derived DA neuron models can provide an accurate prediction of clinical efficacy for drug treatments of PD, indicating
promise for utilizing such an integrated approach for testing
miRNA-based therapies. Specifically, it has been shown that a
subset of compounds which were found to have pharmacologic
benefit in mouse models of PD had a protective effect in MPP+treated SH-SY5Y cells, and further that a subset of those were

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 2

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

FIGURE 1 | MiRNA biogenesis and function. (A) The canonical miRNA
biogenesis pathway is Drosha- and Dicer-dependent. It begins with RNA Pol
II-mediated transcription of genomic loci containing miRNA genes. The
primary transcript is referred to as pri-miRNA and like other RNA Pol II
transcripts contains a 5 7-methylgunaosine cap and 3 poly-A tail. The
pri-miRNA is processed in the nucleus by Drosha and DGCR8 to form
pre-miRNA. The pre-miRNA is then exported into the cytoplasm by Exportin-5
where it is further processed by the RNase III enzyme, Dicer. Interaction with
Dicer leads to hairpin cleavage and degradation of the anti-sense strand of the
miRNA duplex, while the mature guide strand is complexed with members of

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

the Argonaute family of proteins to form a functional RNA-induced silencing
complex (RISC). (B) In a Drosha-dependent and Dicer-independent
non-canonical pathway of miRNA biogenesis, the cytoplasmic pri-miRNA
undergoes processing by AGO2, although the precise mechanism of miRNA
maturation via this pathway remains unclear. (C) Another non-canonical
pathway involving Drosha-independent/Dicer-dependent biogenesis
generates mirtrons, transcribed from intronic sequences and obtained by
splicing and lariat-debranching. Mature miRNA can act via three primary
methods: (1) destabilization and cleavage of target mRNA, (2) translational
repression, and (3) mRNA stabilization.

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 3

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

protective in MPP+-treated iPSC-derived TH+ neurons (Peng
et al., 2013). Importantly, those compounds which were effective
in both SH-SY5Y and iPSC-derived TH+ neurons had the greatest benefit when translated to patient care (Peng et al., 2013).
Similar integrative approaches using non-human primate and
human iPSC culture models have been successful in predicting
miRNA-based therapeutic efficacy (Chan and Kocerha, 2012).
Thus, this integrative approach provides a means of thoroughly
testing miRNA-based therapeutics with a readout that can provide an indication of clinical effectiveness as never previously
attainable.

INTERACTION BETWEEN miRNA AND PD-RELATED GENES
PD-RELATED GENES

Of the 28 distinct chromosomal loci that have been convincingly linked to PD, only six have been demonstrated to cause
heritable monogenic PD (Klein and Westenberger, 2012). Table 1
lists these six genes, their mode of inheritance, and the cellular
pathways currently thought to be affected. The following sections discuss studies which have identified miRNA interactions
with these genes; these are summarized in Figure 2. No studies
to date have identified direct miRNA interactions with PINK1 or
ATP13A2.

ALPHA SYNUCLEIN LEVELS ARE REGULATED BY miR-7 AND miR-153

Alpha synuclein has a long-known role in PD pathogenesis. Point
mutations, duplications, and triplications in this gene are sufficient to cause the death of DA neurons via alpha synuclein aggregation and neurotoxicity (Singleton et al., 2003). Additionally,
alpha synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies, a pathologic hallmark of PD (Spillantini et al., 1997, 1998). A doseresponse relationship of this gene has been described, in which
individuals with alpha synuclein multiplications develop PD at
an earlier onset age and with increasing severity associated with
dementia (Singleton et al., 2003; Farrer et al., 2004). Where the
overproduction of a gene product is the mechanism by which the
gene contributes to PD pathogenesis, there is a clear implication
that miRNA-mediated gene suppression might hold potential to
improve the disease phenotype.
Using this as a basis for investigation, two groups independently discovered miR-7 as a regulator of alpha synuclein
expression (Junn et al., 2009; Doxakis, 2010). Junn et al. demonstrated that miR-7 levels are higher in the substantia nigra and
striatum of mice, compared to cerebral cortex and cerebellum.

Table 1 | PD-related genes.
PD-related gene
symbol

Gene
name

Mode of
inheritance

Relevance in PD

PARK1/PARK4

Alpha
synuclein

Autosomal
dominant

Point mutations and gene
multiplications cause
synucleinopathy

PARK2

Parkin

Autosomal
recessive

Loss of E3
ubiquitin-ligase activity
leads to aberrancies of
ubiquitin-proteasome
system and mitophagy

PARK6

PINK1

Autosomal
recessive

Dysfunction of
mitochondrial quality
control

PARK7

DJ-1

Autosomal
recessive

Dysfunction of
mitochondrial quality
control

PARK8

LRRK2

Autosomal
dominant

Gain of kinase activity;
proposed aberrancies of
membrane trafficking and
cytoskeletal dynamics

PARK9

ATP13A2

Autosomal
recessive

Causes Kufor-Rakeb
syndrome (atypical PD);
normally located in
lysosomal membrane,
retained in ER in disease

Mutations in these six genes have been demonstrated to cause inherited monogenic forms of PD. Several miRNAs have been identified to regulate particular
genes in this list, including alpha synuclein and LRRK2. A miRNA-gene interaction has been described for DJ-1 and Parkin, however the mechanisms remain
elusive. Each of these interactions is described in detail in the text. Of note, no

FIGURE 2 | MiRNA regulation of PD-related genes. Novel findings
supporting the role of miRNA in regulating key PD-related genes are shown.
Alpha synuclein was predicted to have seed sequences in the 3 UTR for
miR-7 and miR-153. This was experimentally validated by Junn et al. (miR-7)
and Doxakis (miR-7 and miR-153) in several PD-relevant models, including
mice challenged with MPTP and MPP+-treated SH-SY5Y cells. DJ-1 and
Parkin were found to be coordinately regulated with miR-34b and miR-34c
expression in PD patient brains and SH-SY5Y cells (Minones-Moyano et al.,
2011). LRRK2 was putatively predicted to be regulated by miR-205 and
experimentally confirmed in post-mortem PD patient brain samples,
primary cultured mouse cortical neurons, and LRRK2 R1441G BAC
transgenic mice (Cho et al., 2013). Interestingly, pathogenic LRRK2 has also
been found to interfere with miRNA processing machinery by complexing
with drosophila AGO1 and human AGO2 (Gehrke et al., 2010).

miRNA have yet been described to interact with PINK1 or ATP13A2.

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 4

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

MiR-7 levels were found to be 40 times higher in neurons than
in astrocytes, and as well alpha synuclein was detected in neurons but not astrocytes. This provides support for endogenous
miR-7 regulation of alpha synuclein levels in neurons. To further understand the potential implications of miR-7 in PD, the
authors investigated miR-7 levels in MPP+ treated SH-SY5Y cells,
and MPTP-intoxicated mice, finding elevated alpha synuclein levels, and reduced miR-7 levels in both cases. This indicates that a
reduction in miR-7 may contribute to nigrostriatal degeneration.
Doxakis et al. independently described a similar result of alpha
synuclein regulation by miR-7, as well as miR-153. Additionally,
overexpression of miR-7 and miR-153 in cultured cortical neurons caused a 30–40% reduction in endogenous alpha synuclein
levels. Taken together these results suggest that delivery of miR-7
and miR-153 may represent an appealing therapeutic strategy to
promote neuroprotection in patients with known alpha synuclein
gene multiplications.
LRRK2 IS TARGETED BY miR-205

The precise normal function of the leucine-rich repeat kinase
2 (LRRK2) has yet to be determined, although recent evidence
suggests involvement in membrane trafficking (West et al., 2005;
Biskup et al., 2006, 2007; Gloeckner et al., 2006; Hatano et al.,
2007; Sakaguchi-Nakashima et al., 2007; Alegre-Abarrategui and
Wade-Martins, 2009; Alegre-Abarrategui et al., 2009; Lee et al.,
2010a,b,c; Tong et al., 2010; Vitte et al., 2010) and cytoskeletal
dynamics (Jaleel et al., 2007; Gandhi et al., 2008; Gillardon, 2009;
Parisiadou et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2010). Mutations in LRRK2
have been identified as the most common cause of dominantly
inherited PD (Brice, 2005; Lesage et al., 2006; Ozelius et al., 2006;
Healy et al., 2008) and importantly, variation in the LRRK2 gene
has been implicated as a risk factor for sporadic PD (Kett and
Dauer, 2012). LRRK2 is thought to contribute to PD pathogenesis
through a gain-of-function mechanism (Kett and Dauer, 2012).
Indeed, the most common LRRK2 mutation, a glycine to serine
substitution at position 2019 (G2019S), leads to increased activity in the activation loop of the kinase domain (West et al., 2005;
Greggio et al., 2006; Jaleel et al., 2007). The finding that LRRK2
inhibition blocks neurotoxicity in vitro and in vivo provides additional support for a gain-of-function mechanism (Greggio et al.,
2006; Smith et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2010a).
Congruent with the notion that increased LRRK2 activity contributes to PD pathogenesis, Cho et al. demonstrated that normal
LRRK2 levels are higher in the frontal cortex of sporadic PD and
PD with dementia (PDD) patients compared to non-pathological
controls (NPC) (Cho et al., 2013). LRRK2 mRNA levels were
found to be comparable between these groups, suggesting posttranscriptional regulation, as would be mediated by miRNA.
MiR-205 was identified as a putative regulator of LRRK2 by target
prediction algorithms. Further investigation revealed significantly
lower levels of miR-205 in the frontal cortex and striatum of PD
and PDD patients, compared to NPC. In primary mouse cortical
neurons, inhibition of miR-205 caused upregulation of LRRK2
protein expression whereas overexpression of miR-205 repressed
LRRK2 protein expression. Strikingly, wild type mouse midbrain
DA neurons displayed a high level of miR-205 and in transgenic mice overexpressing R1441G (arginine to glycine at position

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

1441) mutant LRRK2, miR-205 treatment rescued impairment of
neurite outgrowth. This study described a novel regulatory role
for miR-205 with LRRK2. Given that over-activity of LRRK2 is
suggested to cause PD, therapeutic replacement of miR-205 is an
attractive target for therapeutic intervention, particularly for sporadic cases in which LRRK2 levels were found to be elevated and
miR-205 levels were found to be low.
It is worth noting that new insights are beginning to reveal
a reciprocal role for LRRK2 in regulating miRNA biogenesis by
interfering with the miRNA processing machinery through complexing with drosophila AGO1 and human AGO2 (Gehrke et al.,
2010). Further investigation will be required before a precise role
for LRRK2 regulation of miRNA biogenesis and translational
repression can be fully appreciated.
DJ1 AND PARKIN ARE COORDINATELY REGULATED WITH miR-34B AND
miR-34C

Miñones-Moyano et al. profiled the miRNA expression pattern in
post-mortem tissue from PD patient brains, discovering a dysregulation of miR-34b and miR-34c (Minones-Moyano et al.,
2011). The authors identified miR-34b and miR-34c downregulation at advanced stages of PD finding that miR-34 reduction
compromises neuronal viability by mitochondrial dysfunction
and production of reactive oxygen species in an SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma culture model. They further characterized that the
miR-34b/c reduction is correlated with decreased expression of
DJ1 and Parkin, noting that these proteins were indeed downregulated in PD brain tissue as well. This provides evidence that
miR-34b/c downregulation may involve DJ1 and Parkin, however
the precise mechanism by which this interaction occurs remains
unclear.
It is an important consideration that as DA neurons degenerate
throughout the life of PD patients, post-mortem tissue samples
often lack the quantity and quality of DA neurons necessary to
delineate whether the molecular defects observed are truly relevant to the DA neurons that produce pathology, or whether they
are simply a result of the lack of the diseased neurons in the
region investigated. To date, examinations of post-mortem brain
tissue have provided the most physiologically relevant means of
investigating the molecular mechanisms of PD. Newer models
such as PD patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)derived DA neurons will aid in further interpreting and probing
miRNA mediated defects in human DA neurons and delineating
the precise molecular events which lead to disease.
PREDICTED miRNA TARGETING PD-RELATED GENES

Although significant progress has been made in our understanding of the role miRNA play in regulating PD-related genes,
much remains to be answered. A small number of miRNA have
been identified to regulate the six monogenic PD-causing genes,
whereas many more which can be identified as putative targets by
multiple target prediction algorithms (Enright et al., 2003; John
et al., 2004; Lewis et al., 2005; Grimson et al., 2007; Betel et al.,
2008, 2010; Friedman et al., 2009; Maragkakis et al., 2009a,b;
Garcia et al., 2011), have not been experimentally validated
(Table 2). Although central to discovery of miRNA targets, this
underscores both the limitations of target prediction algorithms

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 5

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

Table 2 | Continued

Table 2 | Putative miRNA targeting PD-related genes.
PD-Related gene

TargetScan

Alpha synuclein
(PARK1/PARK4)

miR-7

miR-539

miR-431

miR-7a
miR-7b
miR-153
miR-223
miR-214
miR-761
miR-3619-5p

miR-7
miR-488
miR-504
miR-487b
miR-374b
miR-374a
miR-144
miR-495
miR-153
miR-129-5p
miR-599
miR-223
miR-449b
miR-449a
miR-34-c-5p
miR-34a
miR-148a
miR-152
miR-148b
miR-539
miR-361-5p
miR-182
miR-29b

miR-23b
miR-153
miR-23a
miR-425
miR-216a
miR-340
miR-133b
miR-133a
miR-125a-3p
miR-485-5p
miR-17
miR-106b
miR-106a
miR-519d
miR-20b
miR-20a
miR-93
miR-342-3p
miR-454
miR-130a
miR-494
miR-222
miR-221

miR-181a
miR-181b

miR-379
miR-544

miR-488
miR-216a

miR-181c

miR-488

miR-203

miR-181d

miR-590-3p

miR-187

miR-4262

miR-708

miR-185

miR-28-5p
miR-599
miR-363
miR-367
miR-25
miR-92b
miR-92a
miR-32
miR-125a-3p
miR-146b-5p
miR-146a
miR-155
miR-758
miR-181c
miR-181b
miR-181a
miR-181d
miR-543

miR-505
miR-320d
miR-320c
miR-320b
miR-320a
miR-140-5p
miR-876-5p
miR-222
miR-221
miR-199b-5p
miR-199a-5p
miR-200a
miR-141
miR-19b
miR-19a
miR-200b
miR-200c
miR-429

Parkin (PARK2)

miRanda

DIANA
microT

PD-Related gene

TargetScan

miR-7

miRanda

DIANA
microT

miR-340
miR-217
DJ-1 (PARK7)

*

miR-128
miR-758
miR-539
miR-216b
miR-544
miR-365
miR-874

LRRK2 (PARK8)

miR-205

miR-384

miR-103

miR-205a

miR-590-3p

miR-708

miR-205b
miR-19a
miR-19b
miR-181a
miR-181b
miR-181c

miR-185
miR-205
miR-543
miR-410
miR-136
miR-301b

miR-28-5p
miR-30a
miR-30b
miR-30c
miR-30d
miR-30e

miR-181d

miR-301a

miR-328

miR-4262
miR-130a
miR-130c
miR-301a
miR-301b
miR-301b-3p
miR-454
miR-721
miR-4295
miR-3666

miR-454
miR-19b
miR-19a
miR-382
miR-144
miR-384
miR-376c
miR-181c
miR-181d
miR-181b
miR-181a
miR-381
miR-300
miR-141

miR-186
miR-429
miR-200c
miR-200b
miR-23b
miR-23a
miR-340
miR-129-5p
miR-32
miR-363
miR-367
miR-92b
miR-92a
miR-25

miR-200a

miR-9

miR-147
miR181c
miR181a
miR181d
miR181b

*

miR181c
miR181a
miR-410
miR-19b
miR-19a
miR-454
miR-205
miR181b
miR181d

miR-107
ATP13A2 (PARK9)

*

miR-199a-5p

miR-424

miR-199b-5p miR-15a
miR-24
miR-299-3p

miR-15b
miR-497

miR-122

miR-433

miR-16

miR-873

miR-195
This table presents miRNA which are independently predicted to target PDrelated genes by three different open-access target prediction algorithms.
Bolded miRNA have been experimentally validated, whereas bolded and itali-

PINK1 (PARK6)

miR-532-3p

miR-346
miR-124
miR-506
miR-216b

*

mentally confirmed. *, No targets found using the following parameters: miRNA
mapped to “Conserved sites for miRNA families broadly conserved among vertebrates” or those listed as “Conserved” in TargetScan; score threshold of 7.3

(Continued)

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

cized miRNAs were identified by all three algorithms, but have not been experi-

in DIANA-microT 3.0.

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 6

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

as well as the necessity for models which more closely recapitulate
the pathophysiology of PD to delineate the specific effects of these
miRNAs in the context of PD.

GLOBAL miRNA DYSREGULATION IN PD PATHOGENESIS
Many compelling lines of evidence suggest a role for global
miRNA dysregulation from interference with miRNA processing
machinery in neurodegeneration. Defects due to Dicer knockout
are evident as early as the embryonic stage in mice, resulting in
defects in cell proliferation (Murchison et al., 2005) and differentiation (Kanellopoulou et al., 2005). Importantly, mouse Dicer
knockouts demonstrate lethality before neurulation (Bernstein
et al., 2003). Depletion of Dicer in the developing mouse neocortex leads to reduction in cortex thickness and defective cortical layering, and the mouse dies shortly after weaning (De
Pietri Tonelli et al., 2008). Several studies have demonstrated
the appearance of hallmarks of neurodegeneration in mouse
brains with conditional knockout of Dicer in cortical, hippocampal, cerebellar, motor and striatal neurons, as well as astroglia
(Schaefer et al., 2007; Cuellar et al., 2008; Davis et al., 2008;
Kawase-Koga et al., 2009; Haramati et al., 2010; Tao et al., 2011).
Furthermore, loss of the DGCR8 component of the microprocessor complex has been shown to produce neuronal and behavioral
defects in mice (Stark et al., 2008). Additionally, mice with lineage
specific defects in miRNA processing machinery have been shown
to develop defects in spinal motor neurons, reminiscent of spinal
muscular atrophy (Haramati et al., 2010) as well as defects in
forebrain neurons, consistent with Alzheimer’s pathology (Hebert
et al., 2010).
One of the first studies to demonstrate a role for miRNAs
in the maintenance of midbrain DA neurons was conducted by
Kim et al. (2007). Cre-mediated deletion of Dicer in ES cells at
stage 4 of differentiation, when post-mitotic DA neurons first
arise, resulted in complete loss of DA neuron accumulation at
stage 5, while the generation of other mature neuronal classes
was less affected (i.e., GABAergic neurons and TUJ1 positive
neurons). Importantly, the phenotype was rescued by transfection of low molecular weight RNA species, indicating that the
observation indeed results from the lack of mature small RNA
species, including miRNA. Furthermore, in a rodent model, conditional knockout of Dicer under the control of the dopamine
transporter (DAT) induced apoptosis in substantia nigra, and
behavioral studies demonstrated dramatically reduced locomotion, reminiscent of the phenotype of human PD. This seminal
study provided some of the first evidence that miRNAs have a
unique role in the development and maintenance of midbrain
DA neurons. We further discuss the roles of specific miRNA in
developing DA neurons in section DA neuron differentiation and
maintenance.

ROLE OF miRNA IN PATHWAYS IMPLICATED IN PD
MOLECULAR PATHOGENESIS
In recent years, dysfunction of a number of critical pathways
has been directly implicated in the pathogenesis underlying PD
(Figure 3). Such aberrant pathways are thought to be a common effector leading to PD in both inherited and sporadic
cases. Whereas the PD-related gene interactions with miRNAs

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

discovered to date generally describe one miRNA interacting with
one gene, perhaps the most impactful role of miRNAs is their
ability to regulate families of related genes. In this regard, understanding the roles of these pathways in PD pathogenesis and the
mechanism by which miRNA may form regulatory networks with
the gene families they comprise will be essential to our ability to
harness the potential of miRNA to serve as neuroprotective and
disease-modifying agents in PD therapy.
PROTEIN QUALITY CONTROL

A well described cellular phenomenon observed in nearly all
forms of neurodegeneration, including PD, is abnormal protein
accumulation (Ross and Poirier, 2004). This protein accumulation is primarily thought to be a result of dysfunctional protein
clearance, although it is worth noting that it may also be the consequence of protein overproduction, as is seen in patients with
alpha synuclein gene multiplications (Singleton et al., 2003). The
two primary mechanisms by which cells perform clearance of
protein aggregates are the UPS and autophagy (Cook et al., 2012).
Whereas the UPS is the primary mechanism by which damaged
or misfolded proteins are degraded by the cell, it has limited
capacity to handle protein aggregates, such as those that form
the characteristic Lewy bodies of PD. In contrast, the autophagy
pathway has the ability to rid the cell of large protein aggregates as well as aged and damaged organelles, including mitochondria (mitophagy). Since damaged mitochondria and protein
aggregation are suggested events upon which PD pathogenesis
converges, autophagy has recently been recognized as a pathway which may unify many divergent cellular etiologies of PD
pathogenesis.
Ubiquitin-proteasome system

The UPS is comprised of E1 ubiquitin-activating enzymes which
generate a reactive thiol ester between the E1 cysteine residues
and the C-terminal glycine of ubiquitin, E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes which carry ubiquitin to the protein substrate, and E3
ubiquitin ligase enzymes which catalyze the ligation of ubiquitin to the protein substrate (Hershko and Ciechanover, 1992).
Whereas E1 and E2 enzymes have non-specific activity, E3 ubiquitin ligases confer target specification. After the addition of a
minimum of four ubiquitin molecules, the protein substrate is
carried into the 20S proteolytic core of the 26S proteasome for
cleavage (Hershko and Ciechanover, 1998; Ciechanover et al.,
2000; Ciechanover and Brundin, 2003).
Dysfunction of the UPS has been implicated in both genetic
and sporadic forms of PD. In brains from sporadic PD patients,
ubiquitinated proteins and components of the UPS appear in
Lewy bodies (Lennox et al., 1989; Lowe et al., 1990; Li et al., 1997;
Auluck et al., 2002; McNaught et al., 2002; Schlossmacher et al.,
2002). Furthermore, Parkin has been identified as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, mutations in which have been confirmed to cause
an autosomal recessively inherited form of early-onset PD (Klein
and Westenberger, 2012). Interestingly, patients with these mutations tend to display a loss of DA neurons, but no Lewy body
accumulation, indicating that Parkin activity may be required
for LB formation (Cook et al., 2012). It is worth noting that
the controversial (Maraganore et al., 2004; Healy et al., 2006)

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 7

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

FIGURE 3 | Overview of pathways implicated in PD pathogenesis and
potential roles of miRNA in therapy. Several well-studied cellular pathways
have now been implicated in PD pathogenesis, with an apparent
convergence on mitochondrial damage, oxidative stress and protein
aggregation leading to DA neuron death and downstream sequelae of the
progressive pathogenic process. In the earliest stages of insult, miRNA may

have their greatest therapeutic benefit as biomarkers, with the potential to
identify patients before the appearance of symptoms, allowing early
therapeutic intervention. Throughout the disease course, miRNA might serve
as neuroprotectants owing to their ability to regulate families of genes. Later
in the disease course there is the potential for miRNA to serve as
disease-modifying agents and prognostic indicators of disease progression.

ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCHL1/PARK5), gene
acts in the UPS to hydrolyze the E1-ubiquitin bond formed by
E1 ubiquitin-activating enzymes. Thus, despite uncertainty as to
whether UCHL1 is a true PD susceptibility factor, its link to PD
and the UPS overall provides evidence supporting a role for UPS
dysfunction in PD.
The UPS has also been recently identified as a regulator of
miRNA biogenesis (Smibert et al., 2013). In drosophila, interference with the UPS leads to accumulation of AGO1. Additionally,
the stability of AGO2 in mouse cells is linked to miRNA availability. AGO2 is decreased with Dicer-knockout, causing a loss
of miRNAs, but rescued by proteasome blockade. Together these
findings implicate the UPS as an essential regulator of miRNA
biogenesis by controlling levels of miRNA processing enzymes
and RISC components. Although this study provides initial evidence for an interaction between the UPS and miRNA function,

no studies as of yet have directly linked miRNA dysregulation of
the UPS to PD.

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

Autophagy

Autophagy is the only known pathway by which cells can degrade
organelles and protein aggregates that cannot be processed by the
proteasome (Lynch-Day et al., 2012). There are three main types
of autophagy, which are active to varying degrees in different cell
types: chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), microautophagy,
and macroautophagy. CMA is a process wherein misfolded
proteins are carried to lysosomes by chaperone proteins and
transferred across the lysosomal membrane for degradation by
hydrolases. In microautophagy, the lysosome invaginates to take
in misfolded proteins, protein aggregates and other cytosolic substrates. Once inside the lysosome, the vesicle contents are quickly
hydrolyzed. In macroautophagy large sections of the cytosol are

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 8

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

engulfed by a double-membrane vesicle known as an autophagosome. The autophagosome then fuses with lysosomes, releasing
lysosomal enzymes and hydrolases into its lumen to degrade its
contents.
Compared to other cell types, neurons have a higher basal
rate of autophagy, necessary due to the inability to dilute
aged and damaged particles via mitosis (Son et al., 2012).
However, aberrancies in this process have long been postulated as a source of neuronal death and neurodegeneration (Son
et al., 2012). Macroautophagy is the most clearly linked to PD
pathogenesis thus far (Cook et al., 2012). Several studies have
described involvement of the aforementioned PD-related genes
in the autophagy pathway, including LRRK2 and alpha synuclein (Bandyopadhyay and Cuervo, 2007; Alegre-Abarrategui and
Wade-Martins, 2009). Cells harboring alpha synuclein mutations and gene multiplications have been found to demonstrate greater autophagic clearance of normal mitochondria.
In cell culture models pre-aggregated alpha synuclein is resistant to degradation and impairs autophagy. Mechanistically
these aggregates impair overall macroautophagy by reducing
autophagosome clearance. This potentially could contribute to
the increased cell death observed in aggregate-bearing cells
(Tanik et al., 2013). Furthermore, Parkin and PINK1 have
been described to act in concert to remove damaged mitochondria by promoting their degradation via mitophagy (Lee
et al., 2010b; Matsuda et al., 2010; Narendra et al., 2010).

FIGURE 4 | Autophagy inhibition causes dysregulated miRNA
processing and function. (A) The canonical pathway of miRNA biogenesis is
shown leading to the two best characterized actions of miRNA to cause
degradation of mRNA targets and interfere with mRNA translation. (B)

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

It is suggested that both reduced and overactive autophagy
are detrimental to the health of DA neurons, thus making
miRNAs particularly compelling as therapeutic targets given
their key properties of containing endogenous regulatory mechanisms and functioning to fine-tune the activity of gene
families.
Regulation of miRNA homeostasis by autophagy. A recent paper
by Gibbings et al. demonstrated a novel role for the autophagic
pathway in miRNA homeostasis (Gibbings et al., 2012, 2013). In
this study, it was found that autophagy regulates miRNA biogenesis and function via selective degradation of DICER1 and AGO2.
These enzymes accumulate in cells lacking the key autophagy
genes, ATG5, ATG6, ATG7, as well as the selective autophagy
receptor, CALCOCO2. Interestingly, when the selective receptor CALCOCO2 is depleted, ubiquitinated AGO2 accumulates,
suggesting a role for ubiquitin-mediated clearance, in addition
to ubiquitin-independent recognition events. Importantly, premiRNA, miRNA and miRNA* strands are not degraded by
autophagy. However, when autophagy is inhibited, the ability of
AGO2 to bind miRNA duplexes is decreased, and this prevention of miRNA loading onto AGO2 leads to miRNA instability
and decay. Ultimately, this release of translation repression leads
to overexpression of proteins which are regulated by miRNA
(Figure 4). This is the first study to demonstrate a role for
autophagy in regulating miRNA homeostasis.

Recent findings demonstrate that autophagy inhibition leads to break-down
of miRNA-free Dicer and AGO2, causing downstream miRNA instability and
overexpression of untargeted transcripts (Gibbings et al., 2012, 2013). ∗ ,
antisense miRNA strand, which is degraded during processing.

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 9

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

miRNA downregulation of autophagy in PD. In another recent
paper, Alvarez-Erviti et al. expanded on their previous findings
that LAMP-2A and hsc70, two autophagy mediators, are low in
PD brains by investigating the modulation of the CMA pathway by miRNA (Alvarez-Erviti et al., 2013). Target prediction
identified four putative LAMP-2A targeting miRNAs and two
putative hsc70 targeting miRNAs, which had also been previously
reported to be increased in PD brains (Kim et al., 2007). MiR106a caused a dose-dependent decrease in hsc70 3 UTR activity,
as did miR-224 for LAMP-2A. Ultimately LAMP-2A was found to
be regulated by four and hsc70 by three of the identified miRNAs. Strikingly, alpha synuclein levels increased in response to
all of the miRNAs tested, presumably because of decreased activity of the CMA pathway. Importantly, three miRNA targeting
LAMP-2A and three targeting hsc70 were significantly increased
in PD brain substantia nigra pars compacta and amygdala, associated with a decrease in protein levels. Thus, this paper provides
additional evidence supporting an intricate interplay between
autophagy and miRNA pathways, in this case providing evidence that miRNA may be useful modulators of CMA-related
dysfunction in PD.
Although we are only beginning to uncover the roles of miRNA
in regulating autophagy in the context of PD, already, there are
critical insights gained from studies in other systems that foreshadow investigation in PD-relevant cellular and animal models.
Since it has been suggested that cancer and neurodegeneration are
manifestations of opposing cellular dysfunctions (Plun-Favreau
et al., 2010), studies of miRNA regulation of autophagy in cancer
may provide an invaluable foundation upon which investigations
of miRNA regulation of autophagy in neurodegeneration may
build (Frankel and Lund, 2012).
APOPTOSIS

Many of the mutations and toxins associated with PD are linked
with mitochondrial function, providing a connection between
known risk factors and cellular physiology that could explain
PD pathophysiology. DA neurons in particular are sensitive to
mitochondrial stressors and toxins. The maintenance of ion
gradients underlying neuronal excitability signifies one of the
major energetic burdens for neurons. The energy is generated in
mitochondria, the sites of cellular respiration, which also leads to
the production of damaging superoxide and other reactive oxygen
species (Surmeier et al., 2012).
Superoxide and reactive oxygen species are only a subset of the
stressors that cells encounter and that damage macromolecules
and organelles. In response they can either attempt to regain cellular homeostasis or, if the severity or duration of the encountered
stress is too harmful, they can induce cell death. For example,
when cellular clearing processes like autophagy or mitophagy
fail, apoptosis can be induced. This mechanism normally guarantees the removal of cells that are not able to adapt to the
encountered stress or regain cellular homeostasis. However, programmed cell death can have devastating consequences—in many
neurodegenerative diseases, like PD, these dying cells will not be
replaced.
Apoptosis is a critical pathway of programmed cell death in
which cells undergo a well-defined series of steps that result

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

in the ultimate fragmentation of the nucleus and blebbing of
the cell membrane. A period of massive apoptosis is a necessary step in the normal development of the human brain to
define functional synaptic connectivity. Just as critical however,
is that this process ends at the formation of post-mitotic neurons, as these neurons must then survive throughout the life
of the organism. In recent years, significant progress has been
made in understanding the role of this pathway in neuronal
development and differentiation, as well as the molecular mediators regulating these processes, thus paving the way for future
investigations of molecular aberrations that may lead to disease.
Particularly, iPSCs originating from PD patients have made it
possible to study the molecular events leading to apoptosis in
DA neurons. Several studies have demonstrated that DA neurons generated from iPSCs with familial mutations in LRRK2
and alpha synuclein exhibited greater sensitivity to oxidative
stress and had a higher number of apoptotic neurons (Byers
et al., 2011; Nguyen et al., 2011; Reinhardt et al., 2013). This
increased vulnerability to oxidative stress was also observed in
iPSC-derived DA neurons from idiopathic PD patients (SanchezDanes et al., 2012). Apoptotic markers were also detected in
post-mortem brains of PD patients (Tatton et al., 1998; Hartmann
et al., 2000; Mogi et al., 2000; Tatton, 2000) as well as in animal models of PD, in particular models generated by the DA
neurotoxin MPTP (Tatton and Kish, 1997; Viswanath et al.,
2001).
In the following section we describe how miRNAs modulate programmed cell death during development and disease. MiRNAs would be well positioned to help neurons
regain homeostasis upon cellular stresses. MiRNAs can act
as restorers of homeostasis by resuming normal gene expression through negative feedback loop mechanisms. When miRNAs are components of a positive feedback loop, they can
induce new gene expression patterns that help overcome cellular stress. MiRNAs themselves can also become the targets of regulation and their loss can affect downstream gene
expression.
Apoptosis-promoting miRNA are associated with neuronal
differentiation

Aranha et al. identified three miRNAs with previously described
pro-apoptotic functions to be intimately involved with the
differentiation of CNS subtypes from neural stem cells, including
neurogenesis and gliogenesis (Aranha et al., 2011). This study was
based on recent evidence implicating pro-apoptotic molecules,
such as p53, caspases and Bcl-2 in differentiation and development, and aimed to further understand the role of pro-apoptotic
mediators in neural differentiation processes. The authors characterized miR-14, let7a, and miR-34a upregulation during neural
stem cell differentiation, and demonstrated that their expression, particularly miR-34a, coincided with the appearance of
post-mitotic immature neurons. The use of apoptosis promoting
miRNAs during neuronal development is consistent with the high
rate of neuronal apoptosis that occurs throughout early development during the process of pruning, a normal developmental
program that facilitates the formation of efficient synaptic configurations. Interestingly, however, the increased expression of

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 10

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

these miRNAs was not associated with increased cell death. The
authors hypothesize that the role in this context may be more to
control cell cycle exit and mitotic inhibition, given the timing of
expression and appearance of neuronal and glial subtypes. This
study provides crucial evidence for a novel role of pro-apoptotic
miRNAs in neural differentiation.
Conversely, in a Drosophila model of aging it was shown that
miR-34 is up-regulated in aging brains and deletion of miR-34
leads to accelerated brain ageing, neural degeneration, defective
protein folding, and a decline in survival. Rescue with miR-34 was
sufficient to mitigate mutant effects, wherein inclusion formation
was slowed, protein retained greater solubility and neural degeneration was suppressed. Furthermore, overexpression of miR-34
had a neuroprotective effect in a transgenic Drosophila model
with genetic background that lead to overexpression of neurotoxic
poly-glutamines (Liu et al., 2012).
miR-29b restricts apoptosis and promotes neuronal maturation

In 2011, Kole et al. became the first to identify a mammalian
miRNA with the ability to inhibit the BH3-only family of apoptosis initiators in neurons (Kole et al., 2011). Importantly, the
focus of this paper was on post-mitotic neurons, consistent with
the biological condition in which it would be most important to
restrict further death of neurons. MiR-29b was found to be selectively enriched in sympathetic ganglion, cerebellar and cortical
neurons isolated from postnatal day 28 (P28) mice, compared
to the lower expression level in postnatal day 5 (P5) neurons.
MiR-29b overexpression was sufficient to inhibit apoptosis in
response to three independent stimuli: nerve growth factor (NGF)
deprivation, endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and DNA damage. NGF deprivation leads to c-Jun phosphorylation, BH3-only
induction and subsequent cytochrome c release, caspase activation and cell death. It was determined that miR-29b acts downstream of c-Jun phosphorylation, but upstream of cytochrome
c release, prompting the investigation of a possible interaction
with BH3-only proteins. Strikingly, miR-29b was found to interact with five out of eight members of the BH3-only family of
proteins. The BH3-only protein family repression was responsible for blocking apoptosis only in mature neurons, and protein
expression failed to be induced on NGF deprivation in P28 neurons, while being induced in P5 neurons. The findings of this
paper are particularly important because it is remarkable example of a single miRNA interacting with multiple members of
the same family of proteins. These proteins have been wellcharacterized to serve redundant functions. Thus, it would be
essential that a miRNA capable of affecting the apoptotic pathway through interactions with this family regulate many of its
members. MicroRNA-29 has been previously reported to have
roles in Alzheimer’s disease (Hebert et al., 2008), as well as cancer (Pekarsky et al., 2006; Mott et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2008;
Gebeshuber et al., 2009; Park et al., 2009; Han et al., 2010),
highlighting the cell- and context-specific nature of its role in
regulating apoptosis. Overall, this paper indicates miR-29b as
an important miRNA with the ability to fine-tune apoptosis
activation and regulation via key members of the BH3-only proteins. These findings certainly warrant further investigation in the
context of PD.

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

Downregulation of miRNA through UPR leads to activation of
apoptosis

Extensive research has made a link between accumulation of
unfolded proteins and apoptosis in PD. One of the pathways
activated by accumulating unfolded proteins in the ER is the
unfolded protein response (UPR). UPR signaling requires IRE1α,
an ER membrane localized endonuclease that upon induction
of UPR cleaves the mRNA of XBP1 and this cleavage leads to a
change of its open reading frame and activation of XBP1’s transcription factor activity. If ER stress is too lasting, it can trigger
cell death. This is mediated through the protease caspase-2 as an
early apoptotic switch. Upton et al. now report that IRE1α is the
ER stress sensor that activates caspase-2 and does so through a
mechanism involving miRNAs (Upton et al., 2012). Upon UPR
activation, the RNase activity of IRE1α cleaves selected microRNAs (miR-17, -34a, -96, -125b) that normally repress translation
of caspase-2 mRNA, consequently increasing caspase-2 abundance and activating apoptosis. Whether these events occur in
neurodegenerative disease with UPR activation remains to be
investigated.
MITOCHONDRIAL miRNA

How mitochondrial dysfunction affects miRNAs and how mitochondrial epistasis is regulated by miRNAs is under much investigation. Some evidence came from an in vitro study showing
that RISC loading with small duplex RNA is inefficient in the
absence of ATP, which is generated by mitochondria (Yoda et al.,
2010). In addition, disruption of mitochondrial ATP production
in human cell lines leads to decreased RISC activity caused by failing RISC assembly (Huang et al., 2011). Therefore mitochondrial
dysfunction in PD could lead to an overall weakening of miRNA
pathways. Localization of the RISC complex has been shown in
multivesicular bodies, like late endosomes, P-bodies, and stress
granules. More recently, miRNAs have been detected in mitochondria, providing a link between mitochondrial function and
miRNA regulation.
MiRNAs specifically enriched in mitochondria have received
much attention. Their localization allows regulation of mitochondrial transcription and translation, but potentially could indicate
that miRNAs are stored in mitochondria. In these studies miRNAs
were isolated from mitochondria from a variety of tissues and cell
lines including rat liver (Kren et al., 2009), mouse liver (Bian et al.,
2010), a human epithelial carcinoma cell line (HeLa) (Bandiera
et al., 2011), a human embryonic kidney cell line (HEK293)
(Sripada et al., 2012) and human skeletal muscle cells (Barrey
et al., 2011). Technically, it was crucial that the isolated mitochondria were highly purified and treated with RNase to remove
mitochondria-bound cytosolic RNA prior to miRNA extraction
to avoid unwanted contamination.
In 2011, Bandiera et al. provided the first comprehensive view
of mitochondrial associated miRNAs in HeLa cells (Bandiera
et al., 2011). After confirming the presence and activity of AGO2
localized to the mitochondria, the authors set out to identify
mitochondrial associated miRNAs, which they termed mitomiRs.
Comparing isolated cytosolic and mitochondrial RNA fractions,
the authors identified 57 differentially expressed miRNAs, 13 of
which were significantly enriched in mitochondria. Interestingly,

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 11

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

of the 13 miRNA identified, three (miR-1974, -1977 and -1978)
map to the mitochondrial genome. It is important to note, however, that these three mitomiRs map specifically to tRNA and
rRNA genes and were removed from miRBase, among other comprehensive microRNA databases, putting into question whether
they are bona fide miRNAs or breakdown products of tRNAs and
rRNAs. Among the notable findings from this investigation, the
authors were able to ascertain that the mitomiRs had predicted
targets on mitochondrial genes, including those essential for ATP
synthesis coupled electron transport, translation initiation, cell
cycle and mitochondrial translation.
A further study by Sripada et al. took a similar approach
in fractionating cells to isolate mitochondrial RNAs (Sripada
et al., 2012). In this report, however, the authors chose to investigate miRNA from two different commonly studied cell lines,
HEK293 and HeLa, by next generation RNA sequencing on the
Illumina HiSeq2000 platform, with enrichment for small RNA.
The authors note that the same 13 miRNA identified by Bandiera
et al. were represented in their data. The differences observed in
the most abundant miRNAs highlight that in addition to technical
variation in the cellular fractionation procedure, differences in the
method of probing miRNA expression may produce significant
variance. Importantly, RNA sequencing allowed the identification
of several putative novel mitochondrial miRNAs. Interestingly,
only 35 miRNA were similarly expressed in mitochondria of
HEK293 and HeLa cells.
The overlap in the above data sets is surprisingly small and
could be explained by mitochondrial isolation procedure and
the miRNA profiling platform chosen. This again highlights the
importance of consistent sub-fractionation procedures, consistent miRNA probing methods, but possibly also the tissue specificity of mitochondrial miRNA expression. Thus transcriptome
analysis of PD post-mortem tissue, DA neurons from PD animal
models, and patient-specific iPSC-derived neurons will provide
an important link between the mitochondrial dysfunction in disease and changes in miRNA profiles. Several studies of miRNA
function in DA neurons have already laid the path for future
investigation.

DA neuron markers, such as DAT, and resulted in the formation of fewer TH-positive neurons, and lower dopamine release.
Inhibition of miR-133b had the opposite effect to increase
the expression of late DA neuron markers. It is counterintuitive that low miR-133b expression levels are found in human
Parkinsonism, as well as rodent Parkinson’s models, while high
expression of the miR-133b causes fewer mature DA neurons to
form. However, these findings would be consistent with a role
for miR-133b in a negative feedback circuit. Thus, the authors
hypothesize that miR-133b normally functions to suppress Pitx3
expression post-transcriptionally, while Pitx3 induces midbrain
DA gene expression and transcription of its own regulator, miR133b (Figures 5A,B). In support of this hypothesis, the authors
note their finding that overexpression of a Pitx3 transgene lacking

DA NEURON DIFFERENTIATION AND MAINTENANCE

miR-133b regulates Pitx3

The seminal paper for its first demonstration of the role of
miRNAs in midbrain DA neuron development by Kim et al.
has been mentioned previously (Kim et al., 2007). The authors
set out to determine specific miRNAs that mediated the findings described above (see section Global Mirna Dysregulation
in PD Pathogenesis). The authors used a qPCR panel to
quantify 230 miRNA precursors on samples derived from PD
and control midbrain, cerebellum and cerebral cortex, finding
miR-133b to be specifically deficient in PD samples. A similar reduction in miR-133b was observed in Pitx3 mutant mice.
This regulation was confirmed in vitro by luciferase reporters,
showing that Pitx3 activates the miR-133b promoter and secondly that the Pitx3 3 UTR is negatively regulated by miR-133b
overexpression.
Interestingly, in primary embryonic rat midbrain cultures,
overexpression of miR-133b caused decreased expression of late

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

FIGURE 5 | miRNA regulation of key DA neurodevelopmental
genes. (A) miR-133b decreases the expression of late DA neuron
marker signatures, while increasing the expression of early DA neuron
markers (Kim et al., 2007). (B) Pitx3 is capable of inducing miR-133b
expression, while miR-133b is reciprocally capable of regulating Pitx3
expression. The authors hypothesize a negative feedback loop in
which Pitx3 concurrently activates expression of DA maturation genes
and miR-133b and when miR-133b levels reach a threshold consistent
with maturation, they inhibit continued expression of Pitx3. (C)
Summary of miRNA interactions with DA neuron-relevant genes. Two
primary investigations have separately identified miR-132 (Yang et al.,
2012) and miR-133b (Kim et al., 2007) as regulators of Nurr1 and
Pitx3, respectively. It is worth noting that SNPs in both of these
genes have recently been identified as potential causes of
spontaneous Parkinsonism highlighting the relevance of DA
neurodevelopmental events in PD pathogenesis.

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 12

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

the 3 UTR was capable of partially reversing miR-133b mediated
DAT suppression. This finding is also in concert with growing
evidence which suggests that the same miRNAs can function to
fine-tune gene expression in a context-specific manner.
A recent description of a miR-133b null mouse model suggests that miR-133b does not play a significant role in midbrain
DA neuron development and maintenance in vivo. The animals
have normal numbers of midbrain DA neurons during development and aging with unchanged dopamine levels in the striatum.
Further the suggested miR133b target, Pitx3, is unaffected as is
the expression of DA genes tested (Heyer et al., 2012).
miR-132 regulates DA differentiation and maintenance

Another key transcription factor for midbrain DA development is also subjected to miRNA-mediated regulation and was
described in 2011 by Yang et al. who profiled miRNAs in purified DA neurons (Yang et al., 2012). A mouse ES cell line
expressing GFP under control of the TH promoter was generated and allowed a FACS sort for GFP positive cells after 13
days of DA differentiation. A qPCR-based array method was used
to profile relative expression of miRNAs in the GFP-positive,
GFP-negative and neural progenitor populations. MiR-132 was
identified to be more than fivefold higher in GFP-positive cells
than in neural progenitors. MiR-132 overexpression suppressed
DA neuron differentiation, whereas miR-132 down-regulation
promoted the differentiation of DA neurons. Bioinformatic analysis revealed Nurr1 as a putative target of miR-132, which
was confirmed by luciferase reporter assay. The authors further investigated the interaction between Nurr1, BDNF and
miR-132, as Nurr1 was previously known to regulate BDNF,
and BDNF had been previously identified to regulate miR132 expression. They found that Nurr1 and miR-132 expression levels were inversely correlated, while BDNF and miR-132
were coordinately expressed. They hypothesize that a homeostatic mechanism thus exists between Nurr1, BDNF and miR-132
(Figure 5C).
In addition to its role in DA differentiation through regulation
of BDNF and Nurr1, miR-132 has been found to have a prosurvival effect which may contribute to DA neuron maintenance.
A delicate balance between acetylcholine and dopamine signaling
exists within the striatum (Threlfell and Cragg, 2011). It has been
shown that overexpression of acetylcholinesterase (AChE), the
enzyme that catabolizes acetylcholine, has a pro-apoptotic effect
(Park et al., 2004). In PD, declining dopamine signaling in the
striatum may contribute to an acetylcholine imbalance resulting
in relative overexpression of AChE, further promoting the death
of DA neurons (Llinas and Greenfield, 1987). miR-132 has been
found to inhibit AChE, thus suggesting a neuroprotective role for
this miRNA in DA neurons (Shaked et al., 2009). This finding
remains to be investigated in human neuronal models.
Taken together these studies have identified miRNAs as significant regulators of genes necessary for the differentiation and
maintenance of DA neurons. The contrasting results seen in the
aforementioned studies of miR-133b highlight the importance
of further investigation of these particular miRNAs and their
gene-specific interactions in the context of PD patient-specific
iPSC-derived DA neurons.

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

CONCLUSION
This review has presented recent advances in the emerging field
which aims to elucidate the role of miRNAs in PD. Many of
these studies which have arisen in just the last decade have provided strong evidence that dysregulated miRNA serves as an
essential molecular trigger which potentiates pathogenesis in PD.
Here we have highlighted studies which demonstrated a role
for global miRNA dysregulation in aberrant development and
maintenance of DA neurons, a finding which complements the
growing notion that neurodegeneration may be a late manifestation of neurodevelopmental disease. Further, we have included
a discussion of miRNAs that have been found to regulate the
protein clearing pathways, the UPS and autophagy, as well as
those involved in apoptosis, mitochondrial maintenance, and
DA neuron differentiation, aberrancies in each of which have
been previously implicated as cellular and molecular mediators
of PD. Despite the dedicated work of many, and the rapidity
with which advances have occurred, there remain several unanswered questions about the molecular pathogenesis of PD. The
development of novel and robust technologies, such as patientspecific iPSC-derived DA neurons, will further the study of PD
on cellular and molecular levels as never previously attainable.
By applying evidence obtained from pathway-specific analyses
with these new tools, researchers are closing the gap between our
knowledge of the disease process and our desire to advance its
treatment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the NIH Center for
Regenerative Medicine, NIH Oxford-Cambridge Scholars
Program, and Monument Trust Discovery Award from
Parkinson’s UK for funding support during the writing of
this manuscript.

REFERENCES
Akhtar, R. S., and Matthew, B. S. (2012). New concepts in the early and preclinical detection of Parkinson’s disease: therapeutic implications. Expert Rev.
Neurother. 12, 1429–1438. doi: 10.1586/ern.12.144
Alegre-Abarrategui, J., Christian, H., Lufino, M. M., Mutihac, R., Venda, L. L.,
Ansorge, O., et al. (2009). LRRK2 regulates autophagic activity and localizes to
specific membrane microdomains in a novel human genomic reporter cellular
model. Hum. Mol. Genet. 18, 4022–4034. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp346
Alegre-Abarrategui, J., and Wade-Martins, R. (2009). Parkinson disease, LRRK2
and the endocytic-autophagic pathway. Autophagy 5, 1208–1210. doi:
10.4161/auto.5.8.9894
Alvarez-Erviti, L., Seow, Y., Schapira, A. H., Rodriguez-Oroz, M. C., Obeso, J. A.,
and Cooper, J. M. (2013). Influence of microRNA deregulation on chaperonemediated autophagy and alpha-synuclein pathology in Parkinson’s disease. Cell
Death Dis. 4:e545. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.73
Alvarez-Erviti, L., Yiqi, S., HaiFang, Y., Corinne, B., Samira, L., and Wood, M. J. A.
(2011). Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brain by systemic injection of targeted
exosomes. Nat Biotech. 29, 341–345. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1807
Ameres, S. L., and Zamore, P. D. (2013). Diversifying microRNA sequence and
function. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14, 475–488. doi: 10.1038/nrm3611
Antonini, A., and Cilia, R. (2009). Behavioural adverse effects of dopaminergic treatments in Parkinson’s disease: incidence, neurobiological basis, management and prevention. Drug Saf. 32, 475–488. doi: 10.2165/00002018200932060-00004
Aranha, M. M., Santos, D. M., Sola, S., Steer, C. J., and Rodrigues, C. M. (2011).
miR-34a regulates mouse neural stem cell differentiation. PLoS ONE 6:e21396.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021396

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 13

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

Auluck, P. K., Chan, H. Y., Trojanowski, J. Q., Lee, V. M., and Bonini, N. M.
(2002). Chaperone suppression of alpha-synuclein toxicity in a Drosophila
model for Parkinson’s disease. Science 295, 865–868. doi: 10.1126/science.
1067389
Bandiera, S., Ruberg, S., Girard, M., Cagnard, N., Hanein, S., Chretien, D.,
et al. (2011). Nuclear outsourcing of RNA interference components to human
mitochondria. PLoS ONE 6:e20746. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020746
Bandyopadhyay, U., and Cuervo, A. M. (2007). Chaperone-mediated autophagy in
aging and neurodegeneration: lessons from alpha-synuclein. Exp. Gerontol. 42,
120–8. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2006.05.019
Barrey, E., Saint-Auret, G., Bonnamy, B., Damas, D., Boyer, O., and Gidrol, X.
(2011). Pre-microRNA and mature microRNA in human mitochondria. PLoS
ONE 6:e20220. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020220
Bartel, D. P. (2009). MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell
136, 215–233. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.01.002
Beal, M. F. (2010). Parkinson’s disease: a model dilemma. Nature 466, S8–S10. doi:
10.1038/466S8a
Bernstein, E., Kim, S. Y., Carmell, M. A., Murchison, E. P., Alcorn, H., Li, M. Z.,
et al. (2003). Dicer is essential for mouse development. Nat. Genet. 35, 215–217.
doi: 10.1038/ng1253
Betel, D., Koppal, A., Agius, P., Sander, C., and Leslie, C. (2010). Comprehensive
modeling of microRNA targets predicts functional non-conserved and noncanonical sites. Genome Biol. 11, R90. doi: 10.1186/gb-2010-11-8-r90
Betel, D., Wilson, M., Gabow, A., Marks, D. S., and Sander, C. (2008).
The microRNA.org resource: targets and expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 36,
D149–D153. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm995
Bian, Z., Li, L. M., Tang, R., Hou, D. X., Chen, X., Zhang, C. Y., et al. (2010).
Identification of mouse liver mitochondria-associated miRNAs and their potential biological functions. Cell Res. 20, 1076–1078. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.119
Biskup, S., Moore, D. J., Celsi, F., Higashi, S., West, A. B., Andrabi, S. A., et al.
(2006). Localization of LRRK2 to membranous and vesicular structures in
mammalian brain. Ann. Neurol. 60, 557–569. doi: 10.1002/ana.21019
Biskup, S., Moore, D. J., Rea, A., Lorenz-Deperieux, B., Coombes, C. E., Dawson,
V. L., et al. (2007). Dynamic and redundant regulation of LRRK2 and LRRK1
expression. BMC Neurosci. 8:102. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-8-102
Boudreau, R. L., Rodriguez-Lebron, E., and Davidson, B. L. (2011). RNAi medicine
for the brain: progresses and challenges. Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, R21–R27. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddr137
Brice, A. (2005). Genetics of Parkinson’s disease: LRRK2 on the rise. Brain 128,
2760–2762. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh676
Byers, B., Cord, B., Nguyen, H. N., Schule, B., Fenno, L., Lee, P. C., et al. (2011).
SNCA triplication Parkinson’s patient’s iPSC-derived DA neurons accumulate
alpha-synuclein and are susceptible to oxidative stress. PLoS ONE 6:e26159. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0026159
Chan, A. W. S., and Kocerha, J. (2012). The path to microRNA therapeutics in psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. Front. Genet. 3:82. doi:
10.3389/fgene.2012.00082
Cho, H. J., Liu, G., Jin, S. M., Parisiadou, L., Xie, C., Yu, J., et al. (2013). MicroRNA205 regulates the expression of Parkinson’s disease-related leucine-rich repeat
kinase 2 protein. Hum. Mol. Genet. 22, 608–620. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds470
Ciechanover, A., and Brundin, P. (2003). The ubiquitin proteasome system in neurodegenerative diseases: sometimes the chicken, sometimes the egg. Neuron 40,
427–446. doi: 10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00606-8
Ciechanover, A., Orian, A., and Schwartz, A. L. (2000). Ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis: biological regulation via destruction. Bioessays 22, 442–451. doi:
10.1002/(SICI)1521-1878(200005)22:5<442::AID-BIES6>3.0.CO;2-Q
Cook, C., Stetler, C., and Petrucelli, L. (2012). Disruption of protein quality control in Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2:a009423. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a009423
Cotzias, G. C. (1968). L-Dopa for Parkinsonism. N. Engl. J. Med. 278, 630. doi:
10.1056/NEJM196803142781127
Cuellar, T. L., Davis, T. H., Nelson, P. T., Loeb, G. B., Harfe, B. D., Ullian, E., et al.
(2008). Dicer loss in striatal neurons produces behavioral and neuroanatomical
phenotypes in the absence of neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
105, 5614–5619. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0801689105
Davis, T. H., Cuellar, T. L., Koch, S. M., Barker, A. J., Harfe, B. D., McManus, M.
T., et al. (2008). Conditional loss of Dicer disrupts cellular and tissue morphogenesis in the cortex and hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 28, 4322–4330. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4815-07.2008

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

Delay, C., Mandemakers, W., and Hebert, S. S. (2012). MicroRNAs in Alzheimer’s
disease. Neurobiol. Dis. 46, 285–290. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2012.01.003
De Pietri Tonelli, D., Pulvers, J. N., Haffner, C., Murchison, E. P., Hannon, G. J.,
and Huttner, W. B. (2008). miRNAs are essential for survival and differentiation
of newborn neurons but not for expansion of neural progenitors during early
neurogenesis in the mouse embryonic neocortex. Development 135, 3911–3921.
doi: 10.1242/dev.025080
Doxakis, E. (2010). Post-transcriptional regulation of alpha-synuclein expression
by mir-7 and mir-153. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 12726–12734. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.
086827
Enright, A. J., John, B., Gaul, U., Tuschl, T., Sander, C., and Marks, D. S. (2003).
MicroRNA targets in Drosophila. Genome Biol. 5, R1. doi: 10.1186/gb-20035-1-r1
Farrer, M., Kachergus, J., Forno, L., Lincoln, S., Wang, D. S., Hulihan, M.,
et al. (2004). Comparison of kindreds with parkinsonism and alpha-synuclein
genomic multiplications. Ann. Neurol. 55, 174–179. doi: 10.1002/ana.10846
Farris, S., and Giroux, M. (2011). Deep brain stimulation: a review of the procedure and the complications. JAAPA 24, 39–40, 42–45. doi: 10.1097/01720610201102000-00007
Frankel, L. B., and Lund, A. H. (2012). MicroRNA regulation of autophagy.
Carcinogenesis 33, 2018–2025. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs266
Friedman, R. C., Farh, K. K., Burge, C. B., and Bartel, D. P. (2009). Most mammalian mRNAs are conserved targets of microRNAs. Genome Res. 19, 92–105.
doi: 10.1101/gr.082701.108
Gandhi, P. N., Wang, X., Zhu, X., Chen, S. G., and Wilson-Delfosse, A. L. (2008).
The Roc domain of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 is sufficient for interaction with
microtubules. J. Neurosci. Res. 86, 1711–1720. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21622
Garcia, D. M., Baek, D., Shin, C., Bell, G. W., Grimson, A., and Bartel, D. P. (2011).
Weak seed-pairing stability and high target-site abundance decrease the proficiency of lsy-6 and other microRNAs. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 18, 1139–1146. doi:
10.1038/nsmb.2115
Gebeshuber, C. A., Zatloukal, K., and Martinez, J. (2009). miR-29a suppresses tristetraprolin, which is a regulator of epithelial polarity and metastasis. EMBO Rep.
10, 400–405. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.9
Gehrke, S., Imai, Y., Sokol, N., and Lu, B. (2010). Pathogenic LRRK2 negatively
regulates microRNA-mediated translational repression. Nature 466, 637–641.
doi: 10.1038/nature09191
Gibbings, D., Leblanc, P., Jay, F., Pontier, D., Michel, F., Schwab, Y., et al.
(2012). Human prion protein binds Argonaute and promotes accumulation
of microRNA effector complexes. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 19, 517–524, S1. doi:
10.1038/nsmb.2273
Gibbings, D., Mostowy, S., and Voinnet, O. (2013). Autophagy selectively regulates
miRNA homeostasis. Autophagy 9, 781–783. doi: 10.4161/auto.23694
Gillardon, F. (2009). Interaction of elongation factor 1-alpha with leucinerich repeat kinase 2 impairs kinase activity and microtubule bundling
in vitro. Neuroscience 163, 533–539. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.
06.051
Gloeckner, C. J., Kinkl, N., Schumacher, A., Braun, R. J., O’Neill, E., Meitinger,
T., et al. (2006). The Parkinson disease causing LRRK2 mutation I2020T is
associated with increased kinase activity. Hum. Mol. Genet. 15, 223–232. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddi439
Greggio, E., Jain, S., Kingsbury, A., Bandopadhyay, R., Lewis, P., Kaganovich,
A., et al. (2006). Kinase activity is required for the toxic effects of
mutant LRRK2/dardarin. Neurobiol. Dis. 23, 329–341. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2006.
04.001
Grimson, A., Farh, K. K., Johnston, W. K., Garrett-Engele, P., Lim, L. P., and Bartel,
D. P. (2007). MicroRNA targeting specificity in mammals: determinants beyond
seed pairing. Mol. Cell. 27, 91–105. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2007.06.017
Han, Y. C., Park, C. Y., Bhagat, G., Zhang, J., Wang, Y., Fan, J. B., et al. (2010).
microRNA-29a induces aberrant self-renewal capacity in hematopoietic progenitors, biased myeloid development, and acute myeloid leukemia. J. Exp. Med.
207, 475–489. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090831
Haramati, S., Chapnik, E., Sztainberg, Y., Eilam, R., Zwang, R., Gershoni, N., et al.
(2010). miRNA malfunction causes spinal motor neuron disease. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 13111–13116. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1006151107
Hartmann, A., Hunot, S., Michel, P. P., Muriel, M. P., Vyas, S., Faucheux, B. A., et al.
(2000). Caspase-3: A vulnerability factor and final effector in apoptotic death of
dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97,
2875–2880. doi: 10.1073/pnas.040556597

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 14

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

Hatano, T., Kubo, S., Imai, S., Maeda, M., Ishikawa, K., Mizuno, Y., et al. (2007).
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 associates with lipid rafts. Hum. Mol. Genet. 16,
678–690. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm013
Healy, D. G., Abou-Sleiman, P. M., Casas, J. P., Ahmadi, K. R., Lynch, T., Gandhi,
S., et al. (2006). UCHL-1 is not a Parkinson’s disease susceptibility gene. Ann.
Neurol. 59, 627–633. doi: 10.1002/ana.20757
Healy, D. G., Falchi, M., O’Sullivan, S. S., Bonifati, V., Durr, A., Bressman, S., et al.
(2008). Phenotype, genotype, and worldwide genetic penetrance of LRRK2associated Parkinson’s disease: a case-control study. Lancet Neurol. 7, 583–590.
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70117-0
Hebert, S. S., Horre, K., Nicolai, L., Papadopoulou, A. S., Mandemakers, W.,
Silahtaroglu, A. N., et al. (2008). Loss of microRNA cluster miR-29a/b-1 in
sporadic Alzheimer’s disease correlates with increased BACE1/beta-secretase
expression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 6415–6420. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
0710263105
Hebert, S. S., Papadopoulou, A. S., Smith, P., Galas, M. C., Planel, E., Silahtaroglu,
A. N., et al. (2010). Genetic ablation of Dicer in adult forebrain neurons results
in abnormal tau hyperphosphorylation and neurodegeneration. Hum. Mol.
Genet. 19, 3959–3969. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq311
Hershko, A., and Ciechanover, A. (1992). The ubiquitin system for protein degradation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 761–807. doi: 10.1146/annurev.bi.61.070192.
003553
Hershko, A., and Ciechanover, A. (1998). The ubiquitin system. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 67, 425–479. doi: 10.1146/annurev.biochem.67.1.425
Heyer, M. P., Pani, A. K., Smeyne, R. J., Kenny, P. J., and Feng, G. (2012). Normal
midbrain dopaminergic neuron development and function in miR-133b mutant
mice. J. Neurosci. 32, 10887–10894. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1732-12.2012
Huang, L., Mollet, S., Souquere, S., Le Roy, F., Ernoult-Lange, M., Pierron,
G., et al. (2011). Mitochondria associate with P-bodies and modulate
microRNA-mediated RNA interference. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 24219–24230. doi:
10.1074/jbc.M111.240259
Jaleel, M., Nichols, R. J., Deak, M., Campbell, D. G., Gillardon, F., Knebel, A., et al.
(2007). LRRK2 phosphorylates moesin at threonine-558: characterization of
how Parkinson’s disease mutants affect kinase activity. Biochem. J. 405, 307–317.
doi: 10.1042/BJ20070209
Jellinger, K. A. (2012). Neurobiology of cognitive impairment in Parkinson’s
disease. Expert Rev. Neurother. 12, 1451–1466. doi: 10.1586/ern.12.131
John, B., Enright, A. J., Aravin, A., Tuschl, T., Sander, C., and Marks, D.
S. (2004). Human MicroRNA targets. PLoS Biol. 2:e363. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0020363
Junn, E., Lee, K. W., Jeong, B. S., Chan, T. W., Im, J. Y., and Mouradian, M. M.
(2009). Repression of alpha-synuclein expression and toxicity by microRNA-7.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13052–13057. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0906277106
Kanellopoulou, C., Muljo, S. A., Kung, A. L., Ganesan, S., Drapkin, R., Jenuwein,
T., et al. (2005). Dicer-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells are defective
in differentiation and centromeric silencing. Genes Dev. 19, 489–501. doi:
10.1101/gad.1248505
Kawase-Koga, Y., Otaegi, G., and Sun, T. (2009). Different timings of Dicer deletion
affect neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing mouse central nervous
system. Dev. Dyn. 238, 2800–2812. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22109
Kett, L. R., and Dauer, W. T. (2012). Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 for beginners: six
key questions. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2:a009407. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a009407
Kim, J., Inoue, K., Ishii, J., Vanti, W. B., Voronov, S. V., Murchison, E., et al. (2007).
A MicroRNA feedback circuit in midbrain dopamine neurons. Science 317,
1220–1224. doi: 10.1126/science.1140481
Klein, C., and Westenberger, A. (2012). Genetics of Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring
Harb. Perspect. Med. 2:a008888. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a008888
Kole, A. J., Swahari, V., Hammond, S. M., and Deshmukh, M. (2011). miR-29b is
activated during neuronal maturation and targets BH3-only genes to restrict
apoptosis. Genes Dev. 25, 125–130. doi: 10.1101/gad.1975411
Kren, B. T., Wong, P. Y., Sarver, A., Zhang, X., Zeng, Y., and Steer, C. J. (2009).
MicroRNAs identified in highly purified liver-derived mitochondria may play a
role in apoptosis. RNA Biol. 6, 65–72. doi: 10.4161/rna.6.1.7534
Lee, B. D., Shin, J. H., VanKampen, J., Petrucelli, L., West, A. B., Ko, H. S., et al.
(2010a). Inhibitors of leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 protect against models of
Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Med. 16, 998–1000. doi: 10.1038/nm.2199
Lee, J. Y., Nagano, Y., Taylor, J. P., Lim, K. L., and Yao, T. P. (2010b). Diseasecausing mutations in parkin impair mitochondrial ubiquitination, aggregation,

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

and HDAC6-dependent mitophagy. J. Cell Biol. 189, 671–679. doi: 10.1083/jcb.
201001039
Lee, S., Liu, H. P., Lin, W. Y., Guo, H., and Lu, B. (2010c). LRRK2 kinase regulates
synaptic morphology through distinct substrates at the presynaptic and postsynaptic compartments of the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. J. Neurosci.
30, 16959–16969. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1807-10.2010
Lennox, G., Lowe, J., Morrell, K., Landon, M., and Mayer, R. J. (1989). Antiubiquitin immunocytochemistry is more sensitive than conventional techniques
in the detection of diffuse Lewy body disease. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 52,
67–71. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.52.1.67
Lesage, S., Durr, A., Tazir, M., Lohmann, E., Leutenegger, A. L., Janin, S., et al.
(2006). LRRK2 G2019S as a cause of Parkinson’s disease in North African Arabs.
N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 422–423. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc055540
Lewis, B. P., Burge, C. B., and Bartel, D. P. (2005). Conserved seed pairing, often
flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA
targets. Cell 120, 15–20. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.12.035
Li, G. L., Farooque, M., Holtz, A., and Olsson, Y. (1997). Expression of the ubiquitin
carboxyl-terminal hydrolase PGP 9.5 in axons following spinal cord compression trauma. An immunohistochemical study in the rat. APMIS 105, 384–390.
doi: 10.1111/j.1699-0463.1997.tb00585.x
Lin, C. H., Tsai, P. I., Wu, R. M., and Chien, C. T. (2010). LRRK2 G2019S mutation
induces dendrite degeneration through mislocalization and phosphorylation
of tau by recruiting autoactivated GSK3ss. J. Neurosci. 30, 13138–13149. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1737-10.2010
Liu, N., Landreh, M., Cao, K., Abe, M., Hendriks, G. J., Kennerdell, J. R., et al.
(2012). The microRNA miR-34 modulates ageing and neurodegeneration in
Drosophila. Nature 482, 519–523. doi: 10.1038/nature10810
Llinas, R. R., and Greenfield, S. A. (1987). On-line visualization of dendritic release
of acetylcholinesterase from mammalian substantia nigra neurons. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 84, 3047–3050. doi: 10.1073/pnas.84.9.3047
Lowe, J., McDermott, H., Landon, M., Mayer, R. J., and Wilkinson, K. D. (1990).
Ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase (PGP 9.5) is selectively present in ubiquitinated inclusion bodies characteristic of human neurodegenerative diseases.
J. Pathol. 161, 153–160. doi: 10.1002/path.1711610210
Lynch-Day, M. A., Mao, K., Wang, K., Zhao, M., and Klionsky, D. J. (2012). The role
of autophagy in Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 2:a009357.
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a009357
Maraganore, D. M., Lesnick, T. G., Elbaz, A., Chartier-Harlin, M. C., Gasser, T.,
Kruger, R., et al. (2004). UCHL1 is a Parkinson’s disease susceptibility gene.
Ann. Neurol. 55, 512–521. doi: 10.1002/ana.20017
Maragkakis, M., Alexiou, P., Papadopoulos, G. L., Reczko, M., Dalamagas,
T., Giannopoulos, G., et al. (2009a). Accurate microRNA target prediction
correlates with protein repression levels. BMC Bioinformatics 10:295. doi:
10.1186/1471-2105-10-295
Maragkakis, M., Reczko, M., Simossis, V. A., Alexiou, P., Papadopoulos, G.
L., Dalamagas, T., et al. (2009b). DIANA-microT web server: elucidating microRNA functions through target prediction. Nucleic Acids Res. 37,
W273–W276. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp292
Matsuda, N., Sato, S., Shiba, K., Okatsu, K., Saisho, K., Gautier, C. A., et al.
(2010). PINK1 stabilized by mitochondrial depolarization recruits Parkin to
damaged mitochondria and activates latent Parkin for mitophagy. J. Cell Biol.
189, 211–221. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200910140
McNaught, K. S., Belizaire, R., Jenner, P., Olanow, C. W., and Isacson, O.
(2002). Selective loss of 20S proteasome alpha-subunits in the substantia
nigra pars compacta in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 326, 155–158. doi:
10.1016/S0304-3940(02)00296-3
Melton, C., Judson, R. L., and Blelloch, R. (2010). Opposing microRNA families
regulate self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nature 463, 621–626. doi:
10.1038/nature08725
Minones-Moyano, E., Friedlander, M. R., Pallares, J., Kagerbauer, B., Porta, S.,
Escaramis, G., et al. (2013). Upregulation of a small vault RNA (svtRNA2-1a)
is an early event in Parkinson disease and induces neuronal dysfunction. RNA
Biol. 10, 1093–106. doi: 10.4161/rna.24813
Minones-Moyano, E., Porta, S., Escaramis, G., Rabionet, R., Iraola, S., Kagerbauer,
B., et al. (2011). MicroRNA profiling of Parkinson’s disease brains identifies
early downregulation of miR-34b/c which modulate mitochondrial function.
Hum. Mol. Genet. 20, 3067–3078. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr210
Mogi, M., Togari, A., Kondo, T., Mizuno, Y., Komure, O., Kuno, S., et al. (2000).
Caspase activities and tumor necrosis factor receptor R1 (p55) level are elevated

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 15

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

in the substantia nigra from parkinsonian brain. J. Neural Transm. 107, 335–341.
doi: 10.1007/s007020050028
Mott, J. L., Kobayashi, S., Bronk, S. F., and Gores, G. J. (2007). mir-29 regulates Mcl-1 protein expression and apoptosis. Oncogene 26, 6133–6140. doi:
10.1038/sj.onc.1210436
Murchison, E. P., Partridge, J. F., Tam, O. H., Cheloufi, S., and Hannon, G. J. (2005).
Characterization of Dicer-deficient murine embryonic stem cells. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 12135–12140. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0505479102
Narendra, D. P., Jin, S. M., Tanaka, A., Suen, D. F., Gautier, C. A., Shen, J., et al.
(2010). PINK1 is selectively stabilized on impaired mitochondria to activate
Parkin. PLoS Biol. 8:e1000298. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000298
Nguyen, H. N., Byers, B., Cord, B., Shcheglovitov, A., Byrne, J., Gujar,
P., et al. (2011). LRRK2 mutant iPSC-derived DA neurons demonstrate
increased susceptibility to oxidative stress. Cell Stem Cell. 8, 267–280. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2011.01.013
Ouellet, D. L., Perron, M. P., Gobeil, L. A., Plante, P., and Provost, P. (2006).
MicroRNAs in gene regulation: when the smallest governs it all. J. Biomed.
Biotechnol. 2006:69616. doi: 10.1155/JBB/2006/69616
Ozelius, L. J., Senthil, G., Saunders-Pullman, R., Ohmann, E., Deligtisch, A.,
Tagliati, M., et al. (2006). LRRK2 G2019S as a cause of Parkinson’s disease in
Ashkenazi Jews. N. Engl. J. Med. 354, 424–425. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc055509
Parisiadou, L., Xie, C., Cho, H. J., Lin, X., Gu, X. L., Long, C. X., et al. (2009).
Phosphorylation of ezrin/radixin/moesin proteins by LRRK2 promotes the rearrangement of actin cytoskeleton in neuronal morphogenesis. J. Neurosci. 29,
13971–13980. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3799-09.2009
Park, S. E., Kim, N. D., and Yoo, Y. H. (2004). Acetylcholinesterase plays a pivotal
role in apoptosome formation. Cancer Res. 64, 2652–2655. doi: 10.1158/00085472.CAN-04-0649
Park, S. Y., Lee, J. H., Ha, M., Nam, J. W., and Kim, V. N. (2009). miR-29 miRNAs
activate p53 by targeting p85 alpha and CDC42. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 16, 23–29.
doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1533
Pekarsky, Y., Santanam, U., Cimmino, A., Palamarchuk, A., Efanov, A., Maximov,
V., et al. (2006). Tcl1 expression in chronic lymphocytic leukemia is regulated
by miR-29 and miR-181. Cancer Res. 66, 11590–11593. doi: 10.1158/00085472.CAN-06-3613
Peng, J., Liu, Q., Rao, M. S., and Zeng, X. (2013). Using human pluripotent
stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons to evaluate candidate Parkinson’s disease therapeutic agents in MPP+ and rotenone models. J. Biomol. Screen. 18,
522–533. doi: 10.1177/1087057112474468
Pereira, E. A., and Aziz, T. Z. (2006). Surgical insights into Parkinson’s disease. J. R.
Soc. Med. 99, 238–244. doi: 10.1258/jrsm.99.5.238
Pereira, E. A., Green, A. L., Nandi, D., and Aziz, T. Z. (2007). Deep brain stimulation: indications and evidence. Expert Rev. Med. Devices 4, 591–603. doi:
10.1586/17434440.4.5.591
Plun-Favreau, H., Lewis, P. A., Hardy, J., Martins, L. M., and Wood, N. W. (2010).
Cancer and neurodegeneration: between the devil and the deep blue sea. PLoS
Genet. 6:e1001257. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001257
Rao, D. D., Senzer, N., Cleary, M. A., and Nemunaitis, J. (2009). Comparative
assessment of siRNA and shRNA off target effects: what is slowing clinical
development. Cancer Gene Ther. 16, 807–809. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2009.53
Reinhardt, P., Schmid, B., Burbulla, L. F., Schondorf, D. C., Wagner, L., Glatza, M.,
et al. (2013). Genetic correction of a LRRK2 mutation in human iPSCs links
parkinsonian neurodegeneration to ERK-dependent changes in gene expression. Cell Stem Cell. 12, 354–367. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.01.008
Ross, C. A., and Poirier, M. A. (2004). Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative
disease. Nat. Med. 10(Suppl.), S10–S17. doi: 10.1038/nm1066
Sakaguchi-Nakashima, A., Meir, J. Y., Jin, Y., Matsumoto, K., and Hisamoto, N.
(2007). LRK-1, a C. elegans PARK8-related kinase, regulates axonal-dendritic
polarity of SV proteins. Curr. Biol. 17, 592–598. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.01.074
Sanchez-Danes, A., Richaud-Patin, Y., Carballo-Carbajal, I., Jimenez-Delgado, S.,
Caig, C., Mora, S., et al. (2012). Disease-specific phenotypes in dopamine neurons from human iPS-based models of genetic and sporadic Parkinson’s disease.
EMBO Mol Med. 4, 380–395. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201200215
Savitt, J. M., Dawson, V. L., and Dawson, T. M. (2006). Diagnosis and treatment of
Parkinson disease: molecules to medicine. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 1744–1754. doi:
10.1172/JCI29178
Schaefer, A., O’Carroll, D., Tan, C. L., Hillman, D., Sugimori, M., Llinas, R., et al.
(2007). Cerebellar neurodegeneration in the absence of microRNAs. J. Exp. Med.
204, 1553–1558. doi: 10.1084/jem.20070823

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

Schlossmacher, M. G., Frosch, M. P., Gai, W. P., Medina, M., Sharma, N., Forno,
L., et al. (2002). Parkin localizes to the Lewy bodies of Parkinson disease and
dementia with Lewy bodies. Am. J. Pathol. 160, 1655–1667. doi: 10.1016/S00029440(10)61113-3
Shaked, I., Meerson, A., Wolf, Y., Avni, R., Greenberg, D., Gilboa-Geffen,
A., et al. (2009). MicroRNA-132 potentiates cholinergic anti-inflammatory
signaling by targeting acetylcholinesterase. Immunity 31, 965–973. doi:
10.1016/j.immuni.2009.09.019
Singleton, A. B., Farrer, M., Johnson, J., Singleton, A., Hague, S., Kachergus, J., et al.
(2003). alpha-Synuclein locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science
302, 841. doi: 10.1126/science.1090278
Sinha, M., Mukhopadhyay, S., and Bhattacharyya, N. P. (2012). Mechanism(s) of
alteration of micro RNA expressions in Huntington’s disease and their possible
contributions to the observed cellular and molecular dysfunctions in the disease.
Neuromolecular Med. 14, 221–243. doi: 10.1007/s12017-012-8183-0
Smibert, P., Yang, J. S., Azzam, G., Liu, J. L., and Lai, E. C. (2013). Homeostatic
control of Argonaute stability by microRNA availability. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.
20, 789–795. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2606
Smith, W. W., Pei, Z., Jiang, H., Dawson, V. L., Dawson, T. M., and Ross, C.
A. (2006). Kinase activity of mutant LRRK2 mediates neuronal toxicity. Nat.
Neurosci. 9, 1231–1233. doi: 10.1038/nn1776
Son, J. H., Shim, J. H., Kim, K. H., Ha, J. Y., and Han, J. Y. (2012). Neuronal
autophagy and neurodegenerative diseases. Exp. Mol. Med. 44, 89–98. doi:
10.3858/emm.2012.44.2.031
Spillantini, M. G., Crowther, R. A., Jakes, R., Hasegawa, M., and Goedert,
M. (1998). alpha-Synuclein in filamentous inclusions of Lewy bodies from
Parkinson’s disease and dementia with lewy bodies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
95, 6469–6473. doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.11.6469
Spillantini, M. G., Schmidt, M. L., Lee, V. M., Trojanowski, J. Q., Jakes, R., and
Goedert, M. (1997). Alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies. Nature 388, 839–840. doi:
10.1038/42166
Sripada, L., Tomar, D., Prajapati, P., Singh, R., Singh, A. K., and Singh, R. (2012).
Systematic analysis of small RNAs associated with human mitochondria by deep
sequencing: detailed analysis of mitochondrial associated miRNA. PLoS ONE
7:e44873. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044873
Stark, K. L., Xu, B., Bagchi, A., Lai, W. S., Liu, H., Hsu, R., et al. (2008). Altered brain
microRNA biogenesis contributes to phenotypic deficits in a 22q11-deletion
mouse model. Nat. Genet. 40, 751–760. doi: 10.1038/ng.138
Surmeier, D. J., Guzman, J. N., Sanchez, J., and Schumacker, P. T. (2012).
Physiological phenotype and vulnerability in Parkinson’s disease. Cold Spring
Harb. Perspect. Med. 2:a009290. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a009290
Tanik, S. A., Schultheiss, C. E., Volpicelli-Daley, L. A., Brunden, K. R., and Lee, V.
M. (2013). Lewy body-like alpha-synuclein aggregates resist degradation and
impair macroautophagy. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 15194–15210. doi: 10.1074/jbc.
M113.457408
Tao, J., Wu, H., Lin, Q., Wei, W., Lu, X. H., Cantle, J. P., et al. (2011). Deletion of
astroglial Dicer causes non-cell-autonomous neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. J. Neurosci. 31, 8306–8319. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0567-11.2011
Tatton, N. A. (2000). Increased caspase 3 and Bax immunoreactivity accompany
nuclear GAPDH translocation and neuronal apoptosis in Parkinson’s disease.
Exp. Neurol. 166, 29–43. doi: 10.1006/exnr.2000.7489
Tatton, N. A., and Kish, S. J. (1997). In situ detection of apoptotic nuclei in the
substantia nigra compacta of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridinetreated mice using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase labelling and
acridine orange staining. Neuroscience 77, 1037–1048. doi: 10.1016/S03064522(96)00545-3
Tatton, N. A., Maclean-Fraser, A., Tatton, W. G., Perl, D. P., and Olanow, C. W.
(1998). A fluorescent double-labeling method to detect and confirm apoptotic
nuclei in Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 44, S142–S148.
Threlfell, S., and Cragg, S. J. (2011). Dopamine signaling in dorsal versus ventral
striatum: the dynamic role of cholinergic interneurons. Front. Syst. Neurosci.
5:11. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2011.00011
Tong, Y., Yamaguchi, H., Giaime, E., Boyle, S., Kopan, R., Kelleher, R. J. 3rd.,
et al. (2010). Loss of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 causes impairment of protein degradation pathways, accumulation of alpha-synuclein, and apoptotic
cell death in aged mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 9879–9884. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004676107
Upton, J. P., Wang, L., Han, D., Wang, E. S., Huskey, N. E., Lim, L., et al. (2012).
IRE1alpha cleaves select microRNAs during ER stress to derepress translation

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 16

Heman-Ackah et al.

MicroRNAs in Parkinson’s disease pathogenesis

of proapoptotic Caspase-2. Science 338, 818–822. doi: 10.1126/science.
1226191
Viswanath, V., Wu, Y., Boonplueang, R., Chen, S., Stevenson, F. F., Yantiri, F., et al.
(2001). Caspase-9 activation results in downstream caspase-8 activation and bid
cleavage in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced Parkinson’s
disease. J. Neurosci. 21, 9519–9528.
Vitte, J., Traver, S., Maues De Paula, A., Lesage, S., Rovelli, G., Corti, O.,
et al. (2010). Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 is associated with the endoplasmic reticulum in dopaminergic neurons and accumulates in the core of Lewy
bodies in Parkinson disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 69, 959–972. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181efc01c
Wang, H., Garzon, R., Sun, H., Ladner, K. J., Singh, R., Dahlman, J., et al.
(2008). NF-kappaB-YY1-miR-29 regulatory circuitry in skeletal myogenesis
and rhabdomyosarcoma. Cancer Cell. 14, 369–381. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.
10.006
West, A. B., Moore, D. J., Biskup, S., Bugayenko, A., Smith, W. W., Ross, C. A., et al.
(2005). Parkinson’s disease-associated mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase
2 augment kinase activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 16842–16847. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0507360102
Wu, P., Xialin, Z., Houliang, D., Xiaoxia, L., Li, L., and Aimin Ji. (2013).
Roles of long noncoding RNAs in brain development, functional diversification and neurodegenerative diseases. Brain Res. Bull. 97, 69–80. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2013.06.001

Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience

Yang, D., Li, T., Wang, Y., Tang, Y., Cui, H., Tang, Y., et al. (2012). miR-132 regulates
the differentiation of dopamine neurons by directly targeting Nurr1 expression.
J. Cell. Sci. 125, 1673–1682. doi: 10.1242/jcs.086421
Yoda, M., Kawamata, T., Paroo, Z., Ye, X., Iwasaki, S., Liu, Q., et al. (2010).
ATP-dependent human RISC assembly pathways. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 17,
17–23. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1733
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Received: 26 August 2013; accepted: 31 October 2013; published online: 20 November
2013.
Citation: Heman-Ackah SM, Hallegger M, Rao MS and Wood MJA (2013) RISC
in PD: the impact of microRNAs in Parkinson’s disease cellular and molecular
pathogenesis. Front. Mol. Neurosci. 6:40. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2013.00040
This article was submitted to the journal Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience.
Copyright © 2013 Heman-Ackah, Hallegger, Rao and Wood. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

www.frontiersin.org

November 2013 | Volume 6 | Article 40 | 17

