Page 1 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

1

AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases
Michaël Hocquemiller1, Laura Giersch1*, Mickaël Audrain2,3,4*, Samantha Parker, Nathalie
Cartier3,4
1

LYSOGENE, Neuilly sur Seine 92200, France.
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
3
INSERM UMR1169, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay 94100, France
4
CEA, DSV, I²BM, MIRCen, Fontenay-aux-Roses, 92265, France
2

* equally contributed to the work
Corresponding authors:
Nathalie Cartier (nathalie.cartier@inserm.fr)
Michaël Hocquemiller (michael.hocquemiller@lysogene.com)

Author Disclosure Statement:
M.H., S. P. and L.G. are full-time employees of Lysogene.
N.C. is a founder and owner of founder equity of BrainVectis Therapeutics.
M.A. declares that he has no competing interests.

Acknowledgments:
We thank the Agence Nationale pour la Recherche (ANR, “13-BSV1-022-01” grant), the
Fondation France Alzheimer and the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale for their support
in N. C. research on Huntington’s disease (ANR) and Alzheimer’s disease (FA and FRM). M.A.
was supported by a grant from the DIM (domaine d’intérêt majeur) Biotherapy Region Ile de
France.

Page 2 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

2

Abstract ................................................................................................................................................... 3
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction............................................................................................................................................. 7
rAAV gene therapy for neurodegenerative diseases .............................................................................. 8
Lysosomal storage disorders ............................................................................................................... 9
Intraparenchymal delivery .............................................................................................................. 9
CSF delivery ................................................................................................................................... 11
Intravenous delivery ...................................................................................................................... 12
Alzheimer’s disease ........................................................................................................................... 12
Parkinson’s disease ........................................................................................................................... 15
Huntington’s disease ......................................................................................................................... 15
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis ........................................................................................................... 17
Spinal Muscular Atrophy ................................................................................................................... 18
rAAV gene therapy for other disorders affecting the nervous system ................................................. 19
Epilepsy.............................................................................................................................................. 19
Neuropathic pain ............................................................................................................................... 20
Perspective ............................................................................................................................................ 21
Tables and figures.................................................................................................................................. 22
Table 1: Clinical Trials ........................................................................................................................ 22
Table 2: Preclinical trials for Lysosomal Storage Diseases ................................................................ 23
Table 3: Preclinical trials for Neurodegenerative Diseases ............................................................... 25
Table 4: Preclinical trials for Epilepsy and Pain. ................................................................................ 27
Figure 1: CNS injection sites .............................................................................................................. 28
References ............................................................................................................................................. 29

Page 3 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

3

Abstract
Gene therapy is at the cusp of a revolution for treating a large spectrum of central nervous system
(CNS) disorders by providing a durable therapeutic protein with a single administration. Adenoassociated viral (AAV)-mediated gene transfer is of particular interest as a therapeutic tool because
of its safety profile and efficiency in transducing a wide range of cell types. The purpose of this
review is to describe the most notable advancements in preclinical and clinical progress of AAV based
CNS gene therapy and discuss prospects for future development using a new generation of vectors
and delivery.

Page 4 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

4

Abbreviations
AADC:

L-amino acid decarboxylase

AAV:

Adeno-associated virus

AD:

Alzheimer’s disease

ADAR2:

Reduced adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 2

ADK:

Adenosine kinase

ALS:

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

AMD:

Alpha-mannosidosis

APOE:

Apolipoprotein E

APP:

Amyloid precursor protein

ASPA:

Aspartoacylase

BBB:

Blood-brain barrier

BDNF:

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor

CBD3:

Ca2+ channel-binding domain 3

CLN:

Ceroid lipofuscinosis neuronal

CNS:

Central nervous system

CNTR:

Ciliary neurotrophicfactor

CSF:

Cerebro-spinal fluid

CYP46A1:

24-hydroxylase enzyme

DRG:

Dorsal root ganglion

ECE:

Endothelin converting enzyme

EEG:

Electro-encephalogram

GAN:

Giant axonal neuropathy

GCL

Globoid cell leukodystrophy

GDNF:

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor

GFL:

GDNF-family of ligands

GUSB:

Glucuronidase beta

HD:

Huntington disease

HTT:

Huntingtin

ICV:

Intra cerebro-ventricular

Page 5 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

5
IGF:

Insulin-like growth factor

IL:

Interleukine

INCL:

Infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis

ISF:

Interstitial fluid

IT:

Intrathecal

IV:

Intravenous

LINCL:

Late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis

LSD:

Lysosomal storage diseases

mHTT:

mutant Huntingtin

miRNA:

MicroRNA

MLD:

Metachromatic leukodystrophy

MPS:

Mucopolysaccharidoses

MSD:

Multiple sulfatase deficiency

MSNs:

Medium spiny neurons

NAA:

N-Acetyl-Aspartate

NAGLU:

N-acetyl-alpha-glucosaminidase

NEP:

Neprilysin

NGF:

Nerve growth Factor

NFTs:

Neurofibrillary forming tangles

NHP:

Non human primates

NPD:

Niemann-Pick disease

NPY:

Neuropeptide Y

NTN:

Neurturin

PD:

Parkinson Disease

rAAV:

Recombinant adeno-associated virus

SOD1:

Superoxide dismutase 1

SGSH:

N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase

SMA:

Spinal muscular atrophy

SMN:

Survival of motor neuron

SNI:

Spared nerve injury

SNP:

Single nucleotide polymorphisms

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

Page 6 of 39

6

SUMF1:
Sulfatase-modifying enzyme factor 1

TDP:
TAR DNA Binding

TRPV1:
Vanilloid receptor 1

ZFP:
Zinc finger protein

24S-OHC:
24 Hydroxycholesterol

3NP:
3-Nitropropionic acid

Page 7 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

7

Introduction
Neurological disorders are among the most difficult pathologies to treat due to the limited access to
the brain structures protected by physical barriers such as the blood-brain barrier (BBB), the
complexity of the central nervous system (CNS) and cell interactions. Gene therapy is an alternative
to traditional pharmacological approaches that has made important advances over the last decade in
treating genetic disorders and acquired diseases affecting the nervous system.
Experimental use of gene therapy for brain tumors has increasing promise, with a multitude of
research programmes using rAAV gene therapy with systemic or direct administration of therapeutic
agents into the tumor site. This work has not been considered in this review, as the goal to affect the
proliferation of abnormal cells is considered out of scope. The aim of this review is to provide a
thorough summary of the most notable advancements in pre-clinical and clinical research of rAAV
gene delivery in treating neurodegenerative, genetic and acquired diseases affecting the nervous
system.
Adeno-associated virus (AAV) is a small, no enveloped virus that have been the subject of intense
research interest from the gene therapy field. Recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) have
demonstrated remarkable evidence of efficacy and safety in a large number of animal models. They
have become the most commonly used gene therapy vectors for the CNS1 due to their safety, nonpathogenic nature, and ability to infect dividing and quiescent cells in vivo, particularly neurons. rAAV
have also demonstrated very long-term gene expression in vivo2.
Initial preclinical proofs of concept have used first generation vectors based on AAV serotype 2. They
moved from the conceptual stage to clinical trials in several inherited and acquired diseases, such as
Parkinson’s, Batten’s, and Canavan’s disease3 (Table 1). Since then, several other AAV serotypes have
been isolated and engineered AAV strains with improved tissue tropisms and biodistribution have
been extensively characterized in animal models. The recombinant genome of a given serotype can
be packaged into the capsid of another serotype (i.e. rAAV2/5 contains the AAV2 recombinant
genome packaged in the capsid proteins encoded by the cap gene of AAV54). The most studied AAV
serotypes in CNS have been 1, 2, 5, 8, 9 and rh105-8. The effectiveness of a serotype depends on the
brain region, the species, and the targeted cell type. These serotypes efficiently transduce neurons,
however transduction of astrocytes, oligodendrocytes or microglia is limited5, 6, 9 but can be improved
by the use of cell specific promoters10-13. Transduction efficiency of these different serotypes has
been further established in large animal models such as dogs, cats, primates and pigs (Table 2, Table
3 and Table 4), and finally used in therapeutic trials in human patients (Table 1).

Page 8 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

8
Several strategies have been developed to deliver genes to the CNS 14. Initially AAV gene delivery to
the brain relied on intraparenchymal injection(s) in brain regions affected by the considered disease
(Figure 1). This is a straightforward strategy for conditions involving a restricted brain region i.e.
Parkinson’s disease. This approach has also been evaluated in conditions affecting large regions of
the brain such as lysosomal storage diseases (LSD) with major successes in terms of preclinical proof
of efficacy in numerous animal models (Table 2) and also encouraging results, with excellent safety,
in human patients (Table 1) using multiple injection tracks into the brain parenchyma15-17.
Many research groups are developing cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF)-based delivery using intra cerebroventricular (ICV) or cisternal or lumbar intrathecal (IT) administration (Figure 1). These approaches,
require high quantities of vector compared to intraparenchymal injections (Table 1, Table 2, Table 3
and Table 4) but are able to safely deliver secreted proteins, such as growth factors, lysosomal
enzymes or Apoliprotein E (APOE). However, these strategies are associated with increased leakage
of the recombinant vector in the blood circulation and with consequent off-target tissue transduction
and expression in peripheral organs, particularly the liver18, 19. Moreover strategies will be required to
reduce an immune response that may ultimately impair therapeutic benefit in patients 20.
Several studies have focused on evaluating the ability of AAV vectors to cross the BBB in mouse
models and Non-human primates (NPH) following IV administration21-23. If encouraging results could
be obtained in neonate mice, decreased transduction efficiency was observed in the primate brain,
with a shift in rAAV9 tropism from neuronal to glial cells23 throughout the brain and interestingly into
the dorsal root ganglia neurons and motor neurons within the spinal cord21. A study comparing the
ability of different rAAV strains to cross the BBB in mice demonstrates that rAAVrh.10 is at least as
efficient as AAV9 vectors in CNS gene transfer following systemic administration24.

rAAV gene therapy for neurodegenerative diseases
Recent progress in rAAV gene therapy has allowed for novel treatments of both genetic and acquired
neurodegenerative diseases such as lysosomal storage diseases, Alzheimer’s disease (AD),
Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and spinal
muscular atrophy (SMA). Exciting treatment results have been obtained in animal models of the
corresponding human diseases and clinical trials have been, or soon will be, launched.

Page 9 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

9

Lysosomal storage disorders
Lysosomal storage disorders are a group of over 50 individual inherited metabolic diseases resulting
from the deficiency of a lysosomal function responsible for progressive storage of undigested or
partially digested materials leading to cellular and metabolic dysfunction25. Although individually
rare, they have a collective incidence of approximately 1 per 7,000 live births26, and at least 70% of all
LSDs have a significant CNS component that are typically characterized by neuro-inflammation and
neurodegeneration in multiple brain regions27.
Several features of LSDs make them ideal candidates for gene therapy. Each LSD is a single-gene
recessive disorder with a relatively well understood underlying molecular bases. Cross-correction
opens the possibility of genetically modifying a relatively small number of cells so they express and
secrete supraphysiologic levels of the deficient enzyme that can then correct a wide range of cell
types at a distance28. A portion of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes can be secreted and
internalized by neighboring cells via mannose 6-phoshate receptors that are present on the plasma
membrane. In the CNS, circulating lysosomal enzymes can diffuse via the ventricular system or be
transported from the site of production to distal sites via axonal transport29. Levels of induced gene
expression are generally not critical. Low levels of residual enzyme activity resulting from missense
mutations are often associated with significant impacts on the clinical course of the disease30.
Enzyme activities of less than 10% of the physiological level may therefore be sufficient to have a
clinical impact on the disease course. Tight regulation of gene expression is not required since no
deleterious effects are associated with supraphysiological levels of most of the lysosomal enzyme.
The identification or development of small and large animal models recapitulating the clinical course
of LSDs has been and is instrumental in evaluating therapeutic strategies 31.
Several strategies of rAAV infusion have been developed and tested in animal models of neuropathic
LSDs via systemic administration as well as direct injection into the CNS through the brain
parenchyma or the CSF. Main preclinical studies are listed in Table 2 and results of this research is
summarized below.

Intraparenchymal delivery

Intraparenchymal injection effectively treats the CNS of neuropathic LSDs since rAAV and secreted
enzymes can be transported to areas distal from the injection sites29, 32. The relative low dose
required, compared to systemic or CSF administration33, in an immune-privileged site like the brain

Page 10 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

10
also limits the impact of a potential preexisting immunity to AAV serotypes 34. Different sites of
injection into the brain (cortex, striatum, hippocampus, thalamus, ventral tegument, cerebellum)
using different AAV serotypes (1, 2, 5, 9, rh8 and rh10) have been tested in mouse models of
neuropathic LSDs such as GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis, globoid cell leukodystrophy (GCL), NiemannPick (NPD) type A, infantile and late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (INCL and LINCL),
metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD), mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) type I, III and VII (Table 2).
These studies showed that AAV vectors, injected into the parenchyma, are able to lead to
widespread enzyme distribution as well as biochemical and histological correction in large regions of
the mouse brain resulting in improved behavioral symptoms, motor function and lifespan. These
initial data obtained in LSD mice were replicated in large disease animal models in which multiple
parenchymal injections or injection into specific CNS structures with high interconnectivity are more
representative of clinical transferability. For example, widespread expression of enzyme throughout
the brain of MPSI and MPSIIIB mice following injection of rAAV5 in the striatum was also observed in
MPSI and MPSIIIB dogs treated with a similar approach35-37. Injection into the thalamus and deep
cerebellar nucleis of rAAV1 coding for β-galactosidase in GM1 gangliosidosis mice was also
successfully transferred to the feline model with an rAAVrh8 leading to long-term clinical
improvement and survival38, 39. Intraparenchymal injections are particularly applicable to LSDs with
severe neurological but moderate systemic involvement and phase I/II clinical trials have been
performed in LINCL, MPS IIIA, MPSIIIB and MLD (Table 1).
The first phase I/II trial of AAV intraparenchymal injections was for Canavan disease40, a pediatric
neurodegenerative disorder associated with mutations in the gene encoding for aspartoacylase
(ASPA), an enzyme that converts N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA) into acetate and aspartate. Results have
proved the feasibility and overall safety of rAAV injection into the brain via multiple sites of vector
administration. Humoral immune response against the vector was observed in three of the ten
subjects41. Long-term follow-up indicated a decrease in substrate levels in the brain of some patients
and the stabilization of clinical disease 15. A phase I clinical trial in 10 LINCL patients was performed
through the direct injection into the brain parenchyma of rAAV2 carrying the human CLN2 gene. No
safety issue related to the product or the way of administration was reported and there was
evidence of slowing disease progression17. A Phase I/II clinical trial in LINCL is currently ongoing with
a second-generation AAVrh.10-based vector which confers greater enzyme distribution within the
brain and a better immunogenicity profile than rAAV2. rAAVrh.10 was also tested for intracranial
delivery of N-sulfoglucosamine sulfohydrolase (SGSH) and the sulfatase-modifying enzyme factor 1
(SUMF1) genes in MPS IIIA patients. The administration of the vector was safe and well tolerated by
the 4 patients included in the trial after one year. Stabilization in three patients and a possible

Page 11 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

11
improvement in one patient were observed16. Additionally, a phase I/II clinical trial for MPS IIIB using
AAV5 to express N-acetyl-alpha-glucosaminidase (NAGLU) is ongoing as well as a phase I study using
AAVrh.10 for MLD (Table 1). Although further follow-up is necessary, these initial results suggest that
intraparenchymal AAV based gene therapy is a realistic option for neuropathic LSDs.

CSF delivery

Direct delivery to the CSF is an alternative route that has been tested using different AAV serotype (1,
2, 4, 5, 8, 9, rh8 and rh10) via ventricles, cisterna magna, or spinal cord into small and large animal
models of different LSDs such as GM1 and GM2 gangliosidosis, GLC, LINCL, MLD, multiple sulphatase
deficiency (MSD), α-mannosidosis (AMD), MPS I, IIIA, IIIB and VII (Table 2). Initial proof of concept
was made in MPS VII newborn mice where intra cerebro-ventricular (ICV) injection of rAAV1, 2 and 5
resulted in the expression of the glucoronidase beta (GUSB) in broad regions of the CNS42. Similar
observations were reported with rAAV1 in newborn mice models of GLC and GM1 gangliosidosis43, 44
and with rAAV5 in MPS IIIA newborn pups45. Even though broad CNS distribution in newborn mice
could be increased by the potential immaturity of the ependymal barrier, or by its disruption favored
by the large volume of injection, direct targeting of ependymal cell lining by rAAV4 in adult mice
model of MPS VII46 or by rAAV2 in LINCL dog model, also led to broad distribution of enzyme in the
CNS associated with therapeutic benefits47. However, because of the rapid turnover rate of the
ependymal cells48, long-term benefits of this approach need to be confirmed. rAAV9 or rAAVrh10
injected into the cisterna magna showed favorable phenotypic outcomes in mouse and dog models
of MPS type IIIA and B 49, 50, as well as in large models of alpha-mannosidosis (AMD)51, MPSVII52, and
MPSI53. Potential additional positive effects of this approach on the pathology have been observed
but only in absence of serum antibodies against the vector49. Intracisternal administration, although
easily accessible in animal models, is more problematic to translate in human. A less invasive route
into the CSF via lumbar intrathecal injection showed positive results of enzyme distribution in the
brain of MPS I and MPS VII mice models using rAAV254, 55 but have not yet been described in the brain
of larger animal models. A first clinical trial in Batten CLN6 has recently been launched using a selfcomplementary AAV9 carrying the CLN6 gene administered intrathecally by lumbar puncture
(NCT02725580). The minimum calculated dose in this clinical trial (i.e 1,2E+14 gc for a 1 year old child
of ~8kg) is already 30 fold higher than the highest dose (4E+12 gc) tested so far in intraparenchymal
injection clinical trials (Table 1).

Page 12 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

12
Intravenous delivery
The capacity of AAV9 or AAVrh10 serotypes to cross the BBB23, 56 has led to the exploration of
intravenous (IV) injections as an alternative to treat neuropathic LSD (Table 2). Proof of concept has
been shown in neonatal GLC or MLD mice57, 58. AAV9 IV administration has shown an impact on the
CNS pathology of older animal models in MPS III type A and B59, 60 and GM1 gangliosidosis 61.
However, the efficiency of CNS transduction seems to be more limited in older mice as evaluated in
GM2 gangliosidosis62. Moreover, transduction patterns observed in mice can be different from larger
animal species23. The nature of the storage can also limit the efficacy of this approach, as observed in
the MPS VII model where accumulation of sialic acid within the CNS, an inhibitor of AAV9
transduction, precluded any CNS benefit63. The first IV phase I/II clinical trials are currently being
conducted in spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (NCT02122952) and MPS IIIA (NCT02716246). Results on
the interventions potential beneficial change on the CNS aspects of these diseases will demonstrate
whether this approach could be envisaged for other LSDs. A big issue in transition to humans will be
linked to the high doses of virus required to have a therapeutic effect in the CNS (i.e doses up to
3.3E+14gc of AAV9/kg are proposed in the SMA clinical trial).

Significant progress has been made in global CNS targeting using rAAV with evidence of therapeutic
potential for neuropathic LSD. Preclinical studies demonstrate that a variety of serotype and injection
routes can be used to improve neuropathological and functional deficits. Phase I/II clinical trials of
multiple intraparenchymal AAV injections showed the safety of this approach that can delay the
onset or progression of the disease. Studies using larger numbers of patients will be required to
confirm these observations.

Alzheimer’s disease
Key neuropathological hallmarks of AD are extracellular amyloid plaques produced from the
metabolism of the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) and intracellular accumulation of abnormally
phosphorylated Tau protein, a microtubule assembly protein, forming neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs)6466

. The mechanisms underlying these neuropathological changes remain unclear. There is today no

treatment able to stop the progression of the disease. Several gene therapy strategies have been
evaluated, targeting different pathways involved in AD physiopathology, some with encouraging
results.

Page 13 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

13
Strategies to reduce the amyloid accumulation by increasing amyloid degrading proteases, such as
Neprilysin (NEP) and endothelin converting enzyme (ECE)67 or by delivering anti-Aβ single chain
antibody into the corticohippocampal regions of AD mice using AAV vectors were shown to decrease
plaques and Aβ in the cortex and hippocampus of AD mice model68-70, with no sign of neurotoxicity70.
The non-amyloidogenic pathway71 of APP metabolism prevents the production of amyloid toxic
forms and enables the release of the soluble APPsα which is thought to be responsible for the
important physiological functions of APP72. Loss of the neuroprotective APPsα could contribute to
development of AD. APPsα levels are decreased in the CSF of AD patients, in both genetic and
sporadic forms, which is correlated with poor memory73, 74. APPsα inhibits tau phosphorylation
through GSK3β modulation75. Increasing physiological APP pathway is thus an interesting strategy to
treat AD and APPsα overexpression could alleviate AD related symptoms. APPsα overexpression by
the mean of AAV virus in hippocampal neurons of AD mice76 rescued spatial memory defects,
restored synaptic plasticity and spine density, and decreased soluble Aβ and amyloid plaques. This
was associated with microglial activation and amyloid plaques phagocytosis.
Administration of neurotrophic factors are good candidates as neuroprotective strategies but these
factors may cause off-target adverse effects, necessitating a targeted delivery strategy to control
their localization and spread in the brain77. Nerve Growth Factor (NGF), that stimulates the function
of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons undergoing early degeneration in AD78 was evaluated in early
disease onset in animal models. Encouraging preclinical data and the first clinical trial based on
modified fibroblast implantation resulted in a phase 1 clinical trial in which NGF was administered in
ten patients who received rAAV2-NGF into the basal forebrain region (NCT00087789). A dose
escalation protocol was used, 1.2E+10 to 1.2E+11 vector particles79 (Table 1). The brains of patients,
that were examined, exhibited a trophic response to NGF in the form of axonal sprouting toward the
NGF source. Cholinergic neuronal hypertrophy occurred on the NGF-treated side. Activation of
cellular signaling and functional markers was present in the 2 patients who underwent rAAV2-NGF
gene transfer. An overall lower rate of cognitive decline and increased cortical glucose uptake were
reported. A phase II multi-centre, sham-surgery-controlled trial of NGF in AD is ongoing in 49 patients
with mild to moderate AD based on a single administration of AAV-NGF vector that encodes the gene
for nerve growth factor (CERE-110) or an appropriate sham (placebo) surgery control treatment80.
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 2 that plays a critical role in memory consolidation in rodents was
administered using an AAV2 vector in the hippocampus of aged wild-type mice and in APP Tg2576
mice. IGF-2 expression enhanced memory, promoted dendritic spine formation of WT mice,
decreased amyloid levels and rescued behavioural deficits in AD mice, suggesting that IGF-2 may act
as an Aß scavenger81.

Page 14 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

14
Increasing evidence demonstrate the role of inflammation in AD. Anti-inflammatory cytokine
signaling may play an emerging role as neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, and neurohormones in
the brain. Targeting the inflammatory pathway was thus evaluated using interleukin (IL) delivery.
Expression of IL-4 or IL-10 in the brain of AD mice both resulted in reduced astro/microgliosis, Aß
deposition, increased neurogenesis and improved spatial learning82, 83.
The role of lipid metabolism is increasingly evidenced in AD. APOE, a regulator of lipoprotein
metabolism in the CNS that plays several important roles such as cholesterol transport,
neuroplasticity, and inflammation and Aβ clearance and aggregation84 is the major risk factor for late
onset AD. A gene transfer approach to bathe the cortex of amyloid plaque–bearing transgenic mice
with APOE was used by injecting into the lateral ventricles of AD mice an AAV vector expressing the
various human APOE alleles to transduce the ependymal layer. Human APOE proteins diffused into
the CSF and interstitial fluid (ISF). Human APOE isoforms affected the concentrations of soluble
oligomeric Aβ in the ISF, the pace of Aβ fibrillization and deposition, and the extent of peri-plaque
neurotoxic effects. Increase in soluble Aβ, exacerbation of synaptic loss, and the increased number of
dystrophic neurites around each deposit was observed in AD mice receiving APOE4, whereas a
relative protective effect was observed with APOE2. These results suggest that therapeutic
approaches aimed at decreasing APOE4 may be beneficial in AD85.
In AD, altered cholesterol metabolism seems to play a pivotal role in the formation of amyloid
plaques and in tau pathology86. The major exportable form of brain cholesterol is 24hydroxycholesterol (24S-OHC) generated by the neuronal cholesterol 24-hydroxylase enzyme
(CYP46A1). Overexpression of CYP46A1 by administrating in the brain an AAV vector carrying the
CYP46A1 in rodent models of AD reduced the number of amyloid plaques and improved spatial
memory in amyloid models 87 and improved cognitive deficits, impaired long-term depression and
spine defects in mice with tauopathy88 suggesting that CYP46A1 is a relevant target for AD.
All the approaches described have shown good preclinical efficacy in mouse models of AD and raised
hopes for clinical applications in human patients. However, the main hurdle of gene therapy for AD is
the diffusion of the lesions in the brain. AD impacts a number of anatomical sub-regions of the brain
that are involved in learning and memory. AAV-based gene therapy strategies for AD should thus rely
on safe neurosurgical protocols able to target efficiently early affected regions by the mean of
improved delivery methods and use of serotypes with good diffusion properties (anterograde and
retrograde transport). The development of modified AAV vectors able to efficiently cross the BBB
should improve such strategies in the mid future 1, 89-92.

Page 15 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

15

Parkinson’s disease
Many neuroprotective treatments have been developed these past few years for PD which is the
second most common neurodegenerative disorder. In addition to deep brain stimulations and cell
therapies, gene therapies have recently emerged as promising alternatives. For example, it has been
shown that the lysosomal hydrolase glucocerebrosidase activity is reduced in PD. Increasing it by
gene transfer in mouse and rat models of PD showed neuroprotective effects against dopaminergic
neuron degeneration93. Protecting these dopaminergic neurons from Parkinson degenerative
processes have also been shown by the AAV-mediated overexpression of the transcription factors
Nurr1 and Foxa294. As for other diseases such as epilepsy, the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) has been overexpressed in rats and monkeys with lesions of the dopamine system and
showed amelioration of lesion-induced behavioral deficits95, 96. NHPs are indeed of interest to
validate the clinical utility of AAV infusion in brain structures affected by PD such as striatum and
putamen 97 and GDNF overexpression into the striatum and substantia nigra of marmoset monkeys
showed behavioral and anatomical efficacy98. Clinically relevant effects were also obtained in rhesus
macaques where GDNF overexpression promotes restoration of the dopaminergic system in these
regions99, 100. Another strategy often used in gene therapies for PD consists in overexpressing the
enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC). Indeed, AADC is in charge of converting the LDopa, the main medication for PD, to dopamine and is decreased in PD patients. AAV-mediated
overexpression of AADC showed 50% of improvement in L-Dopa responsiveness101 and persistent
results for at least eight years2. CERE-120, an AAV2 coding for the Neurturin (NTN) has been shown
to protect dopaminergic neurons in pre-clinical studies102, 103. Injection of CERE-120 in the putamen
alone or both putamen and substantia nigra in more than a hundred people with PD (Table 1)
showed no adverse effect for up to 5 years104. However, efficacy results were modest with no
significant improvement in primary outcome measures105, 106. To date, several clinical trials are ongoing to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of rAAV-GDNF or rAAV-AADC injection (Table 1). Due
to the recent lack of efficacy of several drugs in phase III such as creatine and ubiquinone, rAAV-gene
therapy for PD seems promising and could offer an interesting alternative.

Huntington’s disease
HD is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder characterized by chorea, dystonia,
progressive cognitive deterioration and psychiatric disturbances evolving to dementia. The disease

Page 16 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

16
usually occurs in mid-life, followed by progressive aggravation of symptoms and death within 10-20
years107, 108. The genetic cause of the disease is a CAG (cytosine-adenine-guanine) triplet repeat
expansion in the huntingtin (HTT) gene exceeding ~ 40 copies. Consequent polyglutamine expansion
within the amino-terminal region of the HTT protein causes abnormal folding and accumulation of
mutant HTT (mHTT) aggregates in cells. Neuroprotective agents have been tested in animal models
to counter the toxic cellular effects of mHtt and improve neuronal survival. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF), because of its functional interaction with HTT, has been evaluated in
animal models of HD. GDNF-family of ligands (GFLs), GDNF (Glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic
factor), neurturin (NTN) and CNTF (Ciliary neurotrophicfactor) have also been shown to support
striatal neurons viability in vitro and in vivo. When administered using rAAV2/1 vector in mice with
QA-toxin lesion, BDNF resulted in reduced motor impairment and striatal damage but toxicity was
observed with weight loss and seizure activity, showing that lower concentrations of BDNF were
necessary for neuroprotection without side-effects109. Single ICV delivery of BDNF and noggin via
rAAV4-BDNF/noggin treated R6/2 mice showed delayed deterioration of motor function and
increased survival110. rAAV2-GDNF was also administered 2 weeks prior to a 3-nitropropionic acid
(3NP) lesion in rats 111 or in the HD mouse model (N171-82Q mice)112 resulting in improved
performances and reduced neuronal atrophy. Neurturin (NTN), shown to protect striatal projection
in excitotoxic models of HD, improved the performance of N171-82Q transgenic HD mice (rotarod
and clasping tests) after rAAV2-NTN (i.e. CERE-120) injection at 5 weeks of age but did not improve
the weight of transgenic animals or their performance in the cognitive radial arm water maze task
compared to control groups113. CNTF was shown to support striatal neurons viability in vitro and in
vivo. However a study has shown that long-term expression of CNTF using the AAV2 vector increases
pathology in the brain of R6/1 transgenic mice114. These results may be due to the high dose (2.7E12
vg/ml rAAV2-CNTF injected unilaterally or bilaterally). Even neurotrophic factors have already been
safely used in clinical trials. Altogether these results indicate that caution must be used to establish
doses when considering viral delivery of neurotrophic factors to protect against toxic effects of mHTT
while avoiding potential side effects.
Direct therapeutic strategies have been developed to target the causative mHTT and reduce the
synthesis of mutant protein and potentially prevent cellular damage. RNA interference strategies
have shown that decreasing mHTT improves the HD phenotype in mouse and rat models112, 115-117.
Using AAV vectors, different approaches have been developed using mHTT mRNA (SNP)-specific
microRNAs and single hairpin RNAs to block formation of the mutant protein, and most recently,
allele-specific blockage of transcription. Allele-specific methods selectively silencing the mHTT are
the most attractive option for HD gene therapy. However, this approach is challenging, since the

Page 17 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

17
mutant gene only differs from the wt allele by the number of CAG repeats, making both alleles
vulnerable. Importantly, some toxic effects of shRNA in vivo were suppressed when placed into
artificial microRNA (miRNA) expression systems and miRNA-based approaches may provide more
appropriate biological tools for expressing inhibitory RNAs in the brain118. Repression of mHTT
production was also tested with zinc finger proteins (ZFPs), using long artificial ZFP chains designed to
bind longer CAG repeats more effectively than shorter repeats. This reduced chromosomal
expression of the mutant gene. In vivo, striatal rAAV2/1 delivery in R6/2 mice revealed repression of
mHTT in the brain resulting in protein aggregate reduction and some improvement of motor and
behavior performance establishing a preliminary proof-of-principle for synthetic transcription factor
repressors in the brain119.
Cholesterol metabolism is impaired in HD and restoring cholesterol metabolism is thus an interesting
therapeutic target. In HD, a decrease of plasma 24S-OH cholesterol, the oxysterol produced by brain
specific 24 Cholesterol hydroxylase (CYP46A1) follows disease progression proportionally to motor
and neuropsychiatric dysfunction and MRI brain atrophy, together with lanosterol and lathosterol
precursors (markers of cholesterol synthesis). Increased accumulation of cholesterol was observed in
striatal neurons together with reduced levels of cholesterol metabolic precursors. CYP46A1 was
recently shown to be decreased in the putamen of HD patients and R6/2 mice. Moreover, striatal
injection of AAVrh10-CYP46A1 vector in R6/2 mice decreased neuronal atrophy, decreased HTT
aggregates and improved motor deficits, as assessed by rotarod and clasping behavioral tests. It also
restored levels of cholesterol and lanosterol and increased levels of desmosterol that were found in
vitro to protect striatal neurons expressing mHTT from death120. These results strongly confirm that
restoring cholesterol metabolism through CYP46A1 overexpression is a relevant therapeutic strategy
in HD.

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
ALS is a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder affecting motor neurons in the spinal cord,
brainstem and cortex. All voluntary controlled muscles can be affected and most ALS patients die
from respiratory failure 2 to 5 years from the onset of symptoms. 10-20% of ALS cases are inherited.
The most studied mutations linked to these familial forms are located in the Cu/Zn superoxide
dismutase 1 gene (SOD1)121. Thereby, SOD1-transgenic animals in which motor neurons degenerate
and animals die shortly after onset of symptoms, are often used as human-like ALS models122. rAAV
coding the IGF-1 was injected into respiratory and motor limb muscles of SOD1G93A mice taking

Page 18 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

18
advantage or the vector retrograde transport from presynaptic terminals of projecting neurons to
the projecting cell nucleus. Vector was transported up to motor neurons of the spinal cord which
allowed to extend survival and delay motor decline123. Lepore et al. used the same strategy but
injected into lumbar spinal cord parenchyma of SOD1G93A mice. The long-term expression of IGF-1
was followed by a delayed disease onset and an extended survival but only in male SOD1G93A
mice124. The neuroprotective effect of IGF-1 in ALS was associated with decreased glial cell–mediated
release of tumor necrosis factor-α and nitric oxide125. The same group also achieved promising
results with a rAAV injection into the lateral and 4th ventricles of SOD1G93A mice126. More recently,
ICV or IT injections of AAV vectors encoding microRNA against SOD1 improved disease outcome in
SOD1G93A mice, with preservation of muscle innervation and neuroprotection127. The abundant
evidence showing the importance of trophic factors to motor neurons as well as these preclinical
results put forward a reliable strategy which could be brought to the clinic. In addition, IL-10
overexpression using rAAV injection in the spinal cord of the SOD1G93A mice produces an immune
modulatory effect with longer survival128. More than 80% of ALS cases are sporadic and most patients
do not carry the SOD1 mutation. Aizawa et al. showed in 2010 a molecular link between reduced
adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 2 (ADAR2) activity and TAR DNA-binding protein (TDP-43)
pathology whose loss from the nucleus and positive cytoplasmic inclusions in motor neurons are
characteristics of sporadic ALS129. Yamashita et al. showed that AAV-ADAR2 delivery in motor
neurons of ADAR2 knockout mice (AR2) enabled the restoration of ADAR2 activity and also
prevented the progression of motor dysfunction and neuronal death130. A few clinical trials using
gene therapy in ALS have been started/completed (NCT00748501, NCT02039401, NCT01041222) but
none with rAAV. Despite this, positive results obtained with preclinical studies abovementioned may
lead to novel promising studies in the clinic.

Spinal Muscular Atrophy
SMA is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease leading to infant mortality caused by a
mutation in the gene survival of motor neuron (SMN). One approach to mitigating the effects of SMN
loss of function is exogenous expression of its gene by introducing viral vectors into motor neurons.
Several groups provided strong evidence for effective AAV-mediated gene therapy on SMA
transgenic mice. AAV9-mediated gene delivery to replace the SMN protein at day one after birth in
SMA mouse resulted in elevated levels of SMN expression and extended survival131. rAAV8-SMN was
injected bilaterally into the lateral ventricles and the upper lumbar spinal cord in SMA mice allowing
improvements in behavioral tests indicating a functional neuromuscular junction and increased

Page 19 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

19
survival from 15 to 50 days132. rAAV9 coding a codon-optimized version of the SMN injected into the
facial vein at day one after birth resulted in a phenotypic correction, a significant increase in
survival133, complete correction of motor function and a major increase of survival from 27 to over
340 days134.
As for SMA, gene therapy has been used to rescue the phenotype of SMA with respiratory distress
type 1 mice. This disease is caused by a mutation in the IGHMBP2 gene. rAAV9-IGHMB2 injection
restored protein levels, rescued motor function and increased life span135.
As for ALS or neuropathic pain, intrathecal injection is a promising strategy and proof of concept to
transduce motor neurons in juvenile farm pigs and monkeys have already been shown136 supporting
the use of gene therapy in clinical studies. To date, one clinical trial is actually ongoing to evaluate
safety and efficacy of intravenous delivery of self-complementary rAAV9-SMN as a potential
treatment (Table 1).

rAAV gene therapy for other disorders affecting the nervous system
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is mainly characterized by seizures caused by an imbalance between excitation and
inhibition of electrical activities between neurons. Even if the cause of most cases of epilepsy is
unknown, some result from a brain lesion inducing mostly focal seizures, whereas others are
associated with genetic defects resulting in generalized seizures. The identification of genetic cases
highlighted several ion channels that helped to understand and investigate epilepsy with the
development of antiepileptic drugs targeting several ion channels. Seizures are often not sufficiently
controlled, with current therapeutics, and new therapies are needed137. rAAV gene therapy has been
used to control seizures in several animal models, mostly based on the overexpression of the
neuropeptide Y (NPY). NPY is a 36 amino-acid member of the pancreatic polypeptide family which is
an endogenous modulator of epileptic activity. AAV-mediated gene transfer to overexpress NPY in
rats

with

electro-encephalogram

(EEG)

seizures

induced

by

intrahippocampal

or

intracerebroventricular kainic acid injection, allowed delayed seizure onset and a reduction in
seizures by 50-75%, 8 weeks after rAAV injection138. Because NPY activates many receptor subtypes
and may result in unwanted side effects, Foti et al. developed a rAAV expressing a truncated form of
NPY that primarily activates the NPY Y2 receptor and obtained a significantly prolonged latency of

Page 20 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

20
limbic seizures, one week after kainic acid injection139. AAV-mediated gene transfer of NPY was also
shown to safely improve anticonvulsant activity in kainic acid treated rats without any glia activation
or humoral immune response140. Other transgenes have been used to attenuate seizures. Galanin, a
neuropeptide with anticonvulsant properties combined with a secretory signal, was overexpressed
with beneficial effects in kainic acid treated rats141. GDNF overexpression also leads to a suppression
of seizures in rat models of temporal lobe epilepsy142. Downregulation of adenosine kinase (ADK) in
mice via AAV-mediated RNA interference completely abolished spontaneous recurrent seizures in
ADK-transgenic mice143. Thus antiepileptogenic and antiseizure effects of these gene therapy
approaches are promising via a decrease of excitatory signals or an increase of inhibitory signals. To
date, no clinical trials with AAV-mediated gene transfer are currently on going but all these
preclinical studies support their application in the clinic.

Neuropathic pain
Even if neuropathic pain is often accompanied by tissue injury, it is a complex state that seems to
have no obvious cause. Analgesic agents are recommended as first-line treatments but analgesia has
limitations such as a short half-life, lack of cellular specificity and undesired potential off-site effects.
Tissue injury and thus the associated pain, is often chronic and localized and thereby suitable for the
use of AAV-mediated gene therapies. A few studies have been carried out using AAV vectors to
deliver several gene targets and treat neuropathic pain. In a model of sciatic nerve injury in WISTAR
rats, AAV vector overexpressing the BDNF was injected in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. One
week after injection a rescue in several behavioral tasks was observed such as an alleviation of tactile
allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia144. Another approach used injection of rAAV expressing the Ca2+
channel-binding domain 3 (CBD3) into the lumbar dorsal root ganglion (DRG) in rats before the
spared nerve injury (SNI). All injected rats presented a significant attenuation of behavioral changes
in pain behavior such as hyperalgesia after touch with a pin or sensitivity to acetone stimulation145.
The knockdown of the voltage-gated sodium channel Nav1.3 via rAAV expressing shRNA was also
evaluated in rats with SNI. rAAV injections were performed into the DRG; a partial attenuation of
nerve injury-induced mechanical allodynia was observed146. Intrathecal injection to treat diabetic
neuropathic pain in diabetic Sprague Dawley rats also showed promising results with efficient
transduction of DRGs and reduction of nociceptive hyperexcitability and neuropathic tactile allodynia
associated with diabetic neuropathic pain147. This method is rapid, less invasive than DRG injection
and clinically applicable. Intrathecal injection of AAV vector encoding shRNA against vanilloid
receptor 1 (TRPV1) into the subarachnoid space of mice, three weeks after a SNI surgery showed a

Page 21 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

21
significant attenuation of thermal hyperalgesia in response to 50°C heat stimulation was observed
from 7 days after treatment148. These encouraging results should prompt evaluation in human
patients with chronic/diabetic neuropathic pain.

Perspective
There is today a tremendous amount of preclinical data demonstrating the relevance and the
feasibility of AAV-based gene therapy to treat CNS disorders, not only for rare genetic diseases but
also opening the door to new therapeutic strategies for more common severe complex conditions.
These have already led to a number of phase I/II clinical applications in human patients with
encouraging results that should allow further developments to treat larger numbers of patients.
Further steps will need to focus on the development of new tools improving safety, efficacy and
simplicity of gene delivery to the brain.
A potential immune response to AAV vectors is still a matter of debate. Direct intraparenchymal
delivery uses considerably lower doses and is less likely to have an impact on a potential immune
response. The development of IT, ICV and eventually IV injection procedures will need much higher
vector doses and will raise the question of immune reactions. Following IV delivery, systemic
exposure to high doses of AAV vectors can trigger the activation of CD8+ T-cell responses directed
against the viral capsid in a dose-dependent manner as observed in hemophilia clinical trials149. Many
approaches are currently developed to address this crucial issue, immunological modulation in
patients, de-targeting vectors using specific promoters and miRNA sequences150-154 and induction of
immune tolerance155-157.
Improved efficacy of AAV vectors will benefit from the characterization of new serotypes that
progressively emerge from the screening of AAV capsid libraries developed by DNA shuffling of
existing AAV capsid genes89, 158-160. This should allow to design customized tools, targeted to specific
brain regions and for specific cell types. Intravenous delivery remains imperfect by the limited
efficacy of AAV vectors to cross the BBB. The development of new tools to transiently increase
permeability of the BBB and of new serotypes with higher crossing capacity90-92 will undoubtedly
modify further strategies for safe and efficient CNS gene delivery. However, this will raise the
consequent and challenging question on the capacity to produce sufficient amounts of vectors for
future clinical applications in a large number of patients 161.

Page 22 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

22

References

1.
Choudhury SR, Hudry E, Maguire CA et al. Viral vectors for therapy of neurologic diseases.
Neuropharmacology 2016.
2.
Hadaczek P, Eberling JL, Pivirotto P et al. Eight years of clinical improvement in MPTPlesioned primates after gene therapy with AAV2-hAADC. Mol Ther 2010;18:1458-1461.
3.
Mingozzi F, High KA. Therapeutic in vivo gene transfer for genetic disease using AAV: progress
and challenges. Nat Rev Genet 2011;12:341-355.
4.
Rabinowitz JE, Rolling F, Li C et al. Cross-packaging of a single adeno-associated virus (AAV)
type 2 vector genome into multiple AAV serotypes enables transduction with broad specificity. J Virol
2002;76:791-801.
5.
Burger C, Gorbatyuk OS, Velardo MJ et al. Recombinant AAV viral vectors pseudotyped with
viral capsids from serotypes 1, 2, and 5 display differential efficiency and cell tropism after delivery to
different regions of the central nervous system. Mol Ther 2004;10:302-317.
6.
Davidson BL, Stein CS, Heth JA et al. Recombinant adeno-associated virus type 2, 4, and 5
vectors: transduction of variant cell types and regions in the mammalian central nervous system.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;97:3428-3432.
7.
Dodiya HB, Bjorklund T, Stansell J, 3rd et al. Differential transduction following basal ganglia
administration of distinct pseudotyped AAV capsid serotypes in nonhuman primates. Mol Ther
2010;18:579-587.
8.
Klein RL, Dayton RD, Tatom JB et al. AAV8, 9, Rh10, Rh43 vector gene transfer in the rat brain:
effects of serotype, promoter and purification method. Mol Ther 2008;16:89-96.
9.
Cearley CN, Wolfe JH. Transduction characteristics of adeno-associated virus vectors
expressing cap serotypes 7, 8, 9, and Rh10 in the mouse brain. Mol Ther 2006;13:528-537.
10.
Furman JL, Sama DM, Gant JC et al. Targeting astrocytes ameliorates neurologic changes in a
mouse model of Alzheimer's disease. J Neurosci 2012;32:16129-16140.
11.
Lawlor PA, Bland RJ, Mouravlev A et al. Efficient gene delivery and selective transduction of
glial cells in the mammalian brain by AAV serotypes isolated from nonhuman primates. Mol Ther
2009;17:1692-1702.
12.
von Jonquieres G, Mersmann N, Klugmann CB et al. Glial promoter selectivity following AAVdelivery to the immature brain. PLoS One 2013;8:e65646.
13.
Weller ML, Stone IM, Goss A et al. Selective overexpression of excitatory amino acid
transporter 2 (EAAT2) in astrocytes enhances neuroprotection from moderate but not severe
hypoxia-ischemia. Neuroscience 2008;155:1204-1211.
14.
Simonato M, Bennett J, Boulis NM et al. Progress in gene therapy for neurological disorders.
Nat Rev Neurol 2013;9:277-291.
15.
Leone P, Shera D, McPhee SW et al. Long-term follow-up after gene therapy for canavan
disease. Sci Transl Med 2012;4:165ra163.
16.
Tardieu M, Zerah M, Husson B et al. Intracerebral administration of AAV rh.10 carrying
human SGSH and SUMF1 cDNAs in children with MPSIIIA disease: results of a phase I/II trial. Hum
Gene Ther 2014.
17.
Worgall S, Sondhi D, Hackett NR et al. Treatment of late infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis by CNS administration of a serotype 2 adeno-associated virus expressing CLN2 cDNA.
Hum Gene Ther 2008;19:463-474.

Page 23 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

23
18.
Gray SJ, Nagabhushan Kalburgi S, McCown TJ et al. Global CNS gene delivery and evasion of
anti-AAV-neutralizing antibodies by intrathecal AAV administration in non-human primates. Gene
Ther 2013.
19.
Meyer K, Ferraiuolo L, Schmelzer L et al. Improving single injection CSF delivery of AAV9mediated gene therapy for SMA: a dose-response study in mice and nonhuman primates. Mol Ther
2015;23:477-487.
20.
Tse LV, Moller-Tank S, Asokan A. Strategies to circumvent humoral immunity to adenoassociated viral vectors. Expert Opin Biol Ther 2015;15:845-855.
21.
Bevan AK, Duque S, Foust KD et al. Systemic gene delivery in large species for targeting spinal
cord, brain, and peripheral tissues for pediatric disorders. Mol Ther 2011;19:1971-1980.
22.
Foust KD, Nurre E, Montgomery CL et al. Intravascular AAV9 preferentially targets neonatal
neurons and adult astrocytes. Nat Biotechnol 2009;27:59-65.
23.
Gray SJ, Matagne V, Bachaboina L et al. Preclinical differences of intravascular AAV9 delivery
to neurons and glia: a comparative study of adult mice and nonhuman primates. Mol Ther
2011;19:1058-1069.
24.
Zhang H, Yang B, Mu X et al. Several rAAV vectors efficiently cross the blood-brain barrier and
transduce neurons and astrocytes in the neonatal mouse central nervous system. Mol Ther
2011;19:1440-1448.
25.
Cox TM, Cachon-Gonzalez MB. The cellular pathology of lysosomal diseases. J Pathol
2012;226:241-254.
26.
Fuller M, Meikle PJ, Hopwood JJ. Epidemiology of lysosomal storage diseases: an overview.
2006.
27.
Bellettato CM, Scarpa M. Pathophysiology of neuropathic lysosomal storage disorders. J
Inherit Metab Dis 2010;33:347-362.
28.
Fratantoni JC, Hall CW, Neufeld EF. Hurler and Hunter syndromes: mutual correction of the
defect in cultured fibroblasts. Science 1968;162:570-572.
29.
Chen F, Vitry S, Hocquemiller M et al. alpha-L-Iduronidase transport in neurites. Mol Genet
Metab 2006;87:349-358.
30.
Leinekugel P, Michel S, Conzelmann E et al. Quantitative correlation between the residual
activity of beta-hexosaminidase A and arylsulfatase A and the severity of the resulting lysosomal
storage disease. Hum Genet 1992;88:513-523.
31.
Hemsley KM, Hopwood JJ. Lessons learnt from animal models: pathophysiology of
neuropathic lysosomal storage disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis 2010;33:363-371.
32.
Salegio EA, Samaranch L, Kells AP et al. Axonal transport of adeno-associated viral vectors is
serotype-dependent. Gene Ther 2012.
33.
Rosenberg JB, Sondhi D, Rubin DG et al. Comparative Efficacy and Safety of Multiple Routes
of Direct CNS Administration of Adeno-Associated Virus Gene Transfer Vector Serotype rh.10
Expressing the Human Arylsulfatase A cDNA to Nonhuman Primates. Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev
2014;25:164-177.
34.
Treleaven CM, Tamsett TJ, Bu J et al. Gene transfer to the CNS is efficacious in immuneprimed mice harboring physiologically relevant titers of anti-AAV antibodies. Mol Ther 2012;20:17131723.
35.
Cressant A, Desmaris N, Verot L et al. Improved behavior and neuropathology in the mouse
model of Sanfilippo type IIIB disease after adeno-associated virus-mediated gene transfer in the
striatum. J Neurosci 2004;24:10229-10239.
36.
Desmaris N, Verot L, Puech JP et al. Prevention of neuropathology in the mouse model of
Hurler syndrome. Ann Neurol 2004;56:68-76.
37.
Ellinwood NM, Ausseil J, Desmaris N et al. Safe, Efficient, and Reproducible Gene Therapy of
the Brain in the Dog Models of Sanfilippo and Hurler Syndromes. Mol Ther 2010.
38.
Baek RC, Broekman ML, Leroy SG et al. AAV-mediated gene delivery in adult GM1gangliosidosis mice corrects lysosomal storage in CNS and improves survival. PLoS One
2010;5:e13468.

Page 24 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

24
39.
McCurdy VJ, Johnson AK, Gray-Edwards HL et al. Sustained normalization of neurological
disease after intracranial gene therapy in a feline model. Sci Transl Med 2014;6:231ra248.
40.
Janson C, McPhee S, Bilaniuk L et al. Clinical protocol. Gene therapy of Canavan disease: AAV2 vector for neurosurgical delivery of aspartoacylase gene (ASPA) to the human brain. Hum Gene
Ther 2002;13:1391-1412.
41.
McPhee SW, Janson CG, Li C et al. Immune responses to AAV in a phase I study for Canavan
disease. J Gene Med 2006;8:577-588.
42.
Passini MA, Watson DJ, Vite CH et al. Intraventricular brain injection of adeno-associated
virus type 1 (AAV1) in neonatal mice results in complementary patterns of neuronal transduction to
AAV2 and total long-term correction of storage lesions in the brains of beta-glucuronidase-deficient
mice. J Virol 2003;77:7034-7040.
43.
Broekman ML, Baek RC, Comer LA et al. Complete correction of enzymatic deficiency and
neurochemistry in the GM1-gangliosidosis mouse brain by neonatal adeno-associated virus-mediated
gene delivery. Mol Ther 2007;15:30-37.
44.
Rafi MA, Zhi Rao H, Passini MA et al. AAV-mediated expression of galactocerebrosidase in
brain results in attenuated symptoms and extended life span in murine models of globoid cell
leukodystrophy. Mol Ther 2005;11:734-744.
45.
Fraldi A, Hemsley K, Crawley A et al. Functional correction of CNS lesions in an MPS-IIIA
mouse model by intracerebral AAV-mediated delivery of sulfamidase and SUMF1 genes. Hum Mol
Genet 2007;16:2693-2702.
46.
Liu G, Martins I, Wemmie JA et al. Functional correction of CNS phenotypes in a lysosomal
storage disease model using adeno-associated virus type 4 vectors. J Neurosci 2005;25:9321-9327.
47.
Katz ML, Tecedor L, Chen Y et al. AAV gene transfer delays disease onset in a TPP1-deficient
canine model of the late infantile form of Batten disease. Sci Transl Med 2015;7:313ra180.
48.
Chauhan AN, Lewis PD. A quantitative study of cell proliferation in ependyma and choroid
plexus in the postnatal rat brain. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 1979;5:303-309.
49.
Haurigot V, Marco S, Ribera A et al. Whole body correction of mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA by
intracerebrospinal fluid gene therapy. J Clin Invest 2013.
50.
Ribera A, Haurigot V, Garcia M et al. Biochemical, histological and functional correction of
mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB by intra-cerebrospinal fluid gene therapy. Hum Mol Genet
2015;24:2078-2095.
51.
Yoon SY, Bagel JH, O'Donnell PA et al. Clinical Improvement of Alpha-mannosidosis Cat
Following a Single Cisterna Magna Infusion of AAV1. Mol Ther 2016;24:26-33.
52.
Gurda BL, De Guilhem De Lataillade A, Bell P et al. Evaluation of AAV-mediated Gene Therapy
for Central Nervous System Disease in Canine Mucopolysaccharidosis VII. Mol Ther 2015.
53.
Hinderer C, Bell P, Gurda BL et al. Intrathecal Gene Therapy Corrects CNS Pathology in a
Feline Model of Mucopolysaccharidosis I. Mol Ther 2014.
54.
Elliger SS, Elliger CA, Aguilar CP et al. Elimination of lysosomal storage in brains of MPS VII
mice treated by intrathecal administration of an adeno-associated virus vector. Gene Ther
1999;6:1175-1178.
55.
Watson G, Bastacky J, Belichenko P et al. Intrathecal administration of AAV vectors for the
treatment of lysosomal storage in the brains of MPS I mice. Gene Ther 2006;13:917-925.
56.
Yang B, Li S, Wang H et al. Global CNS transduction of adult mice by intravenously delivered
rAAVrh.8 and rAAVrh.10 and nonhuman primates by rAAVrh.10. Mol Ther 2014;22:1299-1309.
57.
Miyake N, Miyake K, Asakawa N et al. Long-term correction of biochemical and neurological
abnormalities in MLD mice model by neonatal systemic injection of an AAV serotype 9 vector. Gene
Ther 2014;21:427-433.
58.
Rafi MA, Rao HZ, Luzi P et al. Intravenous injection of AAVrh10-GALC after the neonatal
period in twitcher mice results in significant expression in the central and peripheral nervous systems
and improvement of clinical features. Mol Genet Metab 2015;114:459-466.

Page 25 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

25
59.
Naughton BJ, Duncan FJ, Murrey D et al. Amyloidosis, Synucleinopathy, and Prion
Encephalopathy in a Neuropathic Lysosomal Storage Disease: The CNS-Biomarker Potential of
Peripheral Blood. PLoS One 2013;8:e80142.
60.
Ruzo A, Marco S, Garcia M et al. Correction of pathological accumulation of
glycosaminoglycans in CNS and peripheral tissues of MPSIIIA mice through systemic AAV9 gene
transfer. Hum Gene Ther 2012.
61.
Weismann CM, Ferreira J, Keeler AM et al. Systemic AAV9 gene transfer in adult GM1
gangliosidosis mice reduces lysosomal storage in CNS and extends lifespan. Hum Mol Genet 2015.
62.
Walia JS, Altaleb N, Bello A et al. Long-term correction of sandhoff disease following
intravenous delivery of rAAV9 to mouse neonates. Mol Ther 2015;23:414-422.
63.
Chen YH, Claflin K, Geoghegan JC et al. Sialic Acid Deposition Impairs the Utility of AAV9, but
Not Peptide-modified AAVs for Brain Gene Therapy in a Mouse Model of Lysosomal Storage Disease.
Mol Ther 2012.
64.
Hardy J, Allsop D. Amyloid deposition as the central event in the aetiology of Alzheimer's
disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1991;12:383-388.
65.
Hardy J, Bogdanovic N, Winblad B et al. Pathways to Alzheimer's disease. J Intern Med
2014;275:296-303.
66.
Selkoe DJ. Alzheimer's disease: genes, proteins, and therapy. Physiol Rev 2001;81:741-766.
67.
Miners JS, Barua N, Kehoe PG et al. Abeta-degrading enzymes: potential for treatment of
Alzheimer disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2011;70:944-959.
68.
Carty N, Nash KR, Brownlow M et al. Intracranial injection of AAV expressing NEP but not IDE
reduces amyloid pathology in APP+PS1 transgenic mice. PLoS One 2013;8:e59626.
69.
Carty NC, Nash K, Lee D et al. Adeno-associated viral (AAV) serotype 5 vector mediated gene
delivery of endothelin-converting enzyme reduces Abeta deposits in APP + PS1 transgenic mice. Mol
Ther 2008;16:1580-1586.
70.
Fukuchi K, Tahara K, Kim HD et al. Anti-Abeta single-chain antibody delivery via adenoassociated virus for treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Dis 2006;23:502-511.
71.
Zhang YW, Thompson R, Zhang H et al. APP processing in Alzheimer's disease. Mol Brain
2011;4:3.
72.
Weyer SW, Zagrebelsky M, Herrmann U et al. Comparative analysis of single and combined
APP/APLP knockouts reveals reduced spine density in APP-KO mice that is prevented by APPsalpha
expression. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2014;2:36.
73.
Endres K, Fahrenholz F. Regulation of alpha-secretase ADAM10 expression and activity. Exp
Brain Res 2012;217:343-352.
74.
Fahrenholz F. Alpha-secretase as a therapeutic target. Curr Alzheimer Res 2007;4:412-417.
75.
Deng J, Habib A, Obregon DF et al. Soluble amyloid precursor protein alpha inhibits tau
phosphorylation through modulation of GSK3beta signaling pathway. J Neurochem 2015;135:630637.
76.
Fol R, Braudeau J, Ludewig S et al. Viral gene transfer of APPsalpha rescues synaptic failure in
an Alzheimer's disease mouse model. Acta Neuropathol 2015.
77.
Malkki H. Alzheimer disease: NGF gene therapy activates neurons in the AD patient brain.
Nat Rev Neurol 2015;11:548.
78.
Kordower JH, Winn SR, Liu YT et al. The aged monkey basal forebrain: rescue and sprouting of
axotomized basal forebrain neurons after grafts of encapsulated cells secreting human nerve growth
factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994;91:10898-10902.
79.
Rafii MS, Baumann TL, Bakay RA et al. A phase1 study of stereotactic gene delivery of AAV2NGF for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimers Dement 2014;10:571-581.
80.
Tuszynski MH, Yang JH, Barba D et al. Nerve Growth Factor Gene Therapy: Activation of
Neuronal Responses in Alzheimer Disease. JAMA Neurol 2015;72:1139-1147.
81.
Pascual-Lucas M, Viana da Silva S, Di Scala M et al. Insulin-like growth factor 2 reverses
memory and synaptic deficits in APP transgenic mice. EMBO Mol Med 2014;6:1246-1262.

Page 26 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

26
82.
Kiyota T, Ingraham KL, Swan RJ et al. AAV serotype 2/1-mediated gene delivery of antiinflammatory interleukin-10 enhances neurogenesis and cognitive function in APP+PS1 mice. Gene
Ther 2012;19:724-733.
83.
Kiyota T, Okuyama S, Swan RJ et al. CNS expression of anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin4 attenuates Alzheimer's disease-like pathogenesis in APP+PS1 bigenic mice. FASEB J 2010;24:30933102.
84.
Spinney L. Alzheimer's disease: The forgetting gene. Nature 2014;510:26-28.
85.
Hudry E, Dashkoff J, Roe AD et al. Gene transfer of human Apoe isoforms results in
differential modulation of amyloid deposition and neurotoxicity in mouse brain. Sci Transl Med
2013;5:212ra161.
86.
Ghribi O. Potential mechanisms linking cholesterol to Alzheimer's disease-like pathology in
rabbit brain, hippocampal organotypic slices, and skeletal muscle. J Alzheimers Dis 2008;15:673-684.
87.
Hudry E, Van Dam D, Kulik W et al. Adeno-associated virus gene therapy with cholesterol 24hydroxylase reduces the amyloid pathology before or after the onset of amyloid plaques in mouse
models of Alzheimer's disease. Mol Ther 2010;18:44-53.
88.
Burlot MA, Braudeau J, Michaelsen-Preusse K et al. Cholesterol 24-hydroxylase defect is
implicated in memory impairments associated with Alzheimer-like Tau pathology. Hum Mol Genet
2015;24:5965-5976.
89.
Castle MJ, Turunen HT, Vandenberghe LH et al. Controlling AAV Tropism in the Nervous
System with Natural and Engineered Capsids. Methods Mol Biol 2016;1382:133-149.
90.
Deverman BE, Pravdo PL, Simpson BP et al. Cre-dependent selection yields AAV variants for
widespread gene transfer to the adult brain. Nat Biotechnol 2016;34:204-209.
91.
Choudhury SR, Fitzpatrick Z, Harris AF et al. In vivo selection yields AAV-B1 capsid for CNS and
muscle gene therapy. Mol Ther 2016.
92.
Choudhury SR, Harris AF, Cabral DJ et al. Widespread Central Nervous System Gene Transfer
and Silencing After Systemic Delivery of Novel AAV-AS Vector. Mol Ther 2015.
93.
Rocha EM, Smith GA, Park E et al. Glucocerebrosidase gene therapy prevents alphasynucleinopathy of midbrain dopamine neurons. Neurobiol Dis 2015;82:495-503.
94.
Oh SM, Chang MY, Song JJ et al. Combined Nurr1 and Foxa2 roles in the therapy of
Parkinson's disease. EMBO Mol Med 2015;7:510-525.
95.
Kearns CM, Gash DM. GDNF protects nigral dopamine neurons against 6-hydroxydopamine in
vivo. Brain Res 1995;672:104-111.
96.
Kirik D, Rosenblad C, Burger C et al. Parkinson-like neurodegeneration induced by targeted
overexpression of alpha-synuclein in the nigrostriatal system. J Neurosci 2002;22:2780-2791.
97.
Sanftner LM, Sommer JM, Suzuki BM et al. AAV2-mediated gene delivery to monkey
putamen: evaluation of an infusion device and delivery parameters. Exp Neurol 2005;194:476-483.
98.
Eslamboli A, Cummings RM, Ridley RM et al. Recombinant adeno-associated viral vector
(rAAV) delivery of GDNF provides protection against 6-OHDA lesion in the common marmoset
monkey (Callithrix jacchus). Exp Neurol 2003;184:536-548.
99.
Johnston LC, Eberling J, Pivirotto P et al. Clinically relevant effects of convection-enhanced
delivery of AAV2-GDNF on the dopaminergic nigrostriatal pathway in aged rhesus monkeys. Hum
Gene Ther 2009;20:497-510.
100. Kells AP, Eberling J, Su X et al. Regeneration of the MPTP-lesioned dopaminergic system after
convection-enhanced delivery of AAV2-GDNF. J Neurosci 2010;30:9567-9577.
101. Forsayeth JR, Eberling JL, Sanftner LM et al. A dose-ranging study of AAV-hAADC therapy in
Parkinsonian monkeys. Mol Ther 2006;14:571-577.
102. Gasmi M, Brandon EP, Herzog CD et al. AAV2-mediated delivery of human neurturin to the
rat nigrostriatal system: long-term efficacy and tolerability of CERE-120 for Parkinson's disease.
Neurobiol Dis 2007;27:67-76.
103. Herzog CD, Dass B, Holden JE et al. Striatal delivery of CERE-120, an AAV2 vector encoding
human neurturin, enhances activity of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal system in aged monkeys. Mov
Disord 2007;22:1124-1132.

Page 27 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

27
104. Marks WJ, Jr., Baumann TL, Bartus RT. Long-Term Safety of Patients with Parkinson's Disease
Receiving rAAV2-Neurturin (CERE-120) Gene Transfer. Hum Gene Ther 2016.
105. Herzog CD, Brown L, Kruegel BR et al. Enhanced neurotrophic distribution, cell signaling and
neuroprotection following substantia nigral versus striatal delivery of AAV2-NRTN (CERE-120).
Neurobiol Dis 2013;58:38-48.
106. Marks WJ, Jr., Bartus RT, Siffert J et al. Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson's
disease: a double-blind, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2010;9:1164-1172.
107. Vonsattel JP, DiFiglia M. Huntington disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1998;57:369-384.
108. Vonsattel JP, Myers RH, Stevens TJ et al. Neuropathological classification of Huntington's
disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1985;44:559-577.
109. Kells AP, Henry RA, Connor B. AAV-BDNF mediated attenuation of quinolinic acid-induced
neuropathology and motor function impairment. Gene Ther 2008;15:966-977.
110. Benraiss A, Toner MJ, Xu Q et al. Sustained mobilization of endogenous neural progenitors
delays disease progression in a transgenic model of Huntington's disease. Cell Stem Cell 2013;12:787799.
111. McBride JL, During MJ, Wuu J et al. Structural and functional neuroprotection in a rat model
of Huntington's disease by viral gene transfer of GDNF. Exp Neurol 2003;181:213-223.
112. McBride JL, Ramaswamy S, Gasmi M et al. Viral delivery of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor improves behavior and protects striatal neurons in a mouse model of Huntington's disease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:9345-9350.
113. Ramaswamy S, McBride JL, Han I et al. Intrastriatal CERE-120 (AAV-Neurturin) protects
striatal and cortical neurons and delays motor deficits in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington's
disease. Neurobiol Dis 2009;34:40-50.
114. Denovan-Wright EM, Attis M, Rodriguez-Lebron E et al. Sustained striatal ciliary neurotrophic
factor expression negatively affects behavior and gene expression in normal and R6/1 mice. J
Neurosci Res 2008;86:1748-1757.
115. Franich NR, Fitzsimons HL, Fong DM et al. AAV vector-mediated RNAi of mutant huntingtin
expression is neuroprotective in a novel genetic rat model of Huntington's disease. Mol Ther
2008;16:947-956.
116. Harper SQ, Staber PD, He X et al. RNA interference improves motor and neuropathological
abnormalities in a Huntington's disease mouse model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005;102:5820-5825.
117. Stanek LM, Sardi SP, Mastis B et al. Silencing mutant huntingtin by adeno-associated virusmediated RNA interference ameliorates disease manifestations in the YAC128 mouse model of
Huntington's disease. Hum Gene Ther 2014;25:461-474.
118. McBride JL, Boudreau RL, Harper SQ et al. Artificial miRNAs mitigate shRNA-mediated toxicity
in the brain: implications for the therapeutic development of RNAi. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2008;105:5868-5873.
119. Garriga-Canut M, Agustin-Pavon C, Herrmann F et al. Synthetic zinc finger repressors reduce
mutant huntingtin expression in the brain of R6/2 mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2012;109:E31363145.
120. Boussicault L, Alves S, Lamaziere A et al. CYP46A1, the rate-limiting enzyme for cholesterol
degradation, is neuroprotective in Huntington's disease. Brain 2016;139:953-970.
121. Kunst CB. Complex genetics of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Hum Genet 2004;75:933947.
122. Higgins CM, Jung C, Xu Z. ALS-associated mutant SOD1G93A causes mitochondrial
vacuolation by expansion of the intermembrane space and by involvement of SOD1 aggregation and
peroxisomes. BMC Neurosci 2003;4:16.
123. Kaspar BK, Llado J, Sherkat N et al. Retrograde viral delivery of IGF-1 prolongs survival in a
mouse ALS model. Science 2003;301:839-842.
124. Lepore AC, Haenggeli C, Gasmi M et al. Intraparenchymal spinal cord delivery of adenoassociated virus IGF-1 is protective in the SOD1G93A model of ALS. Brain Res 2007;1185:256-265.

Page 28 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

28
125. Dodge JC, Haidet AM, Yang W et al. Delivery of AAV-IGF-1 to the CNS extends survival in ALS
mice through modification of aberrant glial cell activity. Mol Ther 2008;16:1056-1064.
126. Dodge JC, Treleaven CM, Fidler JA et al. AAV4-mediated expression of IGF-1 and VEGF within
cellular components of the ventricular system improves survival outcome in familial ALS mice. Mol
Ther 2010;18:2075-2084.
127. Dirren E, Aebischer J, Rochat C et al. SOD1 silencing in motoneurons or glia rescues
neuromuscular function in ALS mice. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 2015;2:167-184.
128. Ayers JI, Fromholt S, Sinyavskaya O et al. Widespread and efficient transduction of spinal cord
and brain following neonatal AAV injection and potential disease modifying effect in ALS mice. Mol
Ther 2015;23:53-62.
129. Aizawa H, Sawada J, Hideyama T et al. TDP-43 pathology in sporadic ALS occurs in motor
neurons lacking the RNA editing enzyme ADAR2. Acta Neuropathol 2010;120:75-84.
130. Yamashita T, Chai HL, Teramoto S et al. Rescue of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis phenotype in
a mouse model by intravenous AAV9-ADAR2 delivery to motor neurons. EMBO Mol Med
2013;5:1710-1719.
131. Foust KD, Wang X, McGovern VL et al. Rescue of the spinal muscular atrophy phenotype in a
mouse model by early postnatal delivery of SMN. Nat Biotechnol 2010;28:271-274.
132. Passini MA, Bu J, Roskelley EM et al. CNS-targeted gene therapy improves survival and motor
function in a mouse model of spinal muscular atrophy. J Clin Invest 2010;120:1253-1264.
133. Valori CF, Ning K, Wyles M et al. Systemic delivery of scAAV9 expressing SMN prolongs
survival in a model of spinal muscular atrophy. Sci Transl Med 2010;2:35ra42.
134. Dominguez E, Marais T, Chatauret N et al. Intravenous scAAV9 delivery of a codon-optimized
SMN1 sequence rescues SMA mice. Hum Mol Genet 2011;20:681-693.
135. Nizzardo M, Simone C, Rizzo F et al. Gene therapy rescues disease phenotype in a spinal
muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) mouse model. Sci Adv 2015;1:e1500078.
136. Passini MA, Bu J, Richards AM et al. Translational fidelity of intrathecal delivery of selfcomplementary AAV9-survival motor neuron 1 for spinal muscular atrophy. Hum Gene Ther
2014;25:619-630.
137. Galanopoulou AS, Buckmaster PS, Staley KJ et al. Identification of new epilepsy treatments:
issues in preclinical methodology. Epilepsia 2012;53:571-582.
138. Richichi C, Lin EJ, Stefanin D et al. Anticonvulsant and antiepileptogenic effects mediated by
adeno-associated virus vector neuropeptide Y expression in the rat hippocampus. J Neurosci
2004;24:3051-3059.
139. Foti S, Haberman RP, Samulski RJ et al. Adeno-associated virus-mediated expression and
constitutive secretion of NPY or NPY13-36 suppresses seizure activity in vivo. Gene Ther
2007;14:1534-1536.
140. Noe F, Vaghi V, Balducci C et al. Anticonvulsant effects and behavioural outcomes of rAAV
serotype 1 vector-mediated neuropeptide Y overexpression in rat hippocampus. Gene Ther
2010;17:643-652.
141. Haberman RP, Samulski RJ, McCown TJ. Attenuation of seizures and neuronal death by
adeno-associated virus vector galanin expression and secretion. Nat Med 2003;9:1076-1080.
142. Kanter-Schlifke I, Georgievska B, Kirik D et al. Seizure suppression by GDNF gene therapy in
animal models of epilepsy. Mol Ther 2007;15:1106-1113.
143. Theofilas P, Brar S, Stewart KA et al. Adenosine kinase as a target for therapeutic antisense
strategies in epilepsy. Epilepsia 2011;52:589-601.
144. Eaton MJ, Blits B, Ruitenberg MJ et al. Amelioration of chronic neuropathic pain after partial
nerve injury by adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector-mediated over-expression of BDNF in the rat
spinal cord. Gene Ther 2002;9:1387-1395.
145. Fischer G, Pan B, Vilceanu D et al. Sustained relief of neuropathic pain by AAV-targeted
expression of CBD3 peptide in rat dorsal root ganglion. Gene Ther 2014;21:44-51.
146. Samad OA, Tan AM, Cheng X et al. Virus-mediated shRNA knockdown of Na(v)1.3 in rat dorsal
root ganglion attenuates nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain. Mol Ther 2013;21:49-56.

Page 29 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

29
147. Tan AM, Samad OA, Dib-Hajj SD et al. Virus-Mediated Knockdown of Nav1.3 in Dorsal Root
Ganglia of STZ-Induced Diabetic Rats Alleviates Tactile Allodynia. Mol Med 2015;21:544-552.
148. Hirai T, Enomoto M, Kaburagi H et al. Intrathecal AAV serotype 9-mediated delivery of shRNA
against TRPV1 attenuates thermal hyperalgesia in a mouse model of peripheral nerve injury. Mol
Ther 2014;22:409-419.
149. Mingozzi F, High KA. Immune responses to AAV in clinical trials. Curr Gene Ther 2011;11:321330.
150. Borel F, Kay MA, Mueller C. Recombinant AAV as a platform for translating the therapeutic
potential of RNA interference. Mol Ther 2014;22:692-701.
151. Geisler A, Jungmann A, Kurreck J et al. microRNA122-regulated transgene expression
increases specificity of cardiac gene transfer upon intravenous delivery of AAV9 vectors. Gene Ther
2011;18:199-209.
152. Majowicz A, Maczuga P, Kwikkers KL et al. Mir-142-3p target sequences reduce transgenedirected immunogenicity following intramuscular adeno-associated virus 1 vector-mediated gene
delivery. J Gene Med 2013;15:219-232.
153. Qiao C, Yuan Z, Li J et al. Liver-specific microRNA-122 target sequences incorporated in AAV
vectors efficiently inhibits transgene expression in the liver. Gene Ther 2011;18:403-410.
154. Xie J, Xie Q, Zhang H et al. MicroRNA-regulated, systemically delivered rAAV9: a step closer to
CNS-restricted transgene expression. Mol Ther 2011;19:526-535.
155. Doerfler PA, Todd AG, Clement N et al. Copackaged AAV9 Vectors Promote Simultaneous
Immune Tolerance and Phenotypic Correction of Pompe Disease. Hum Gene Ther 2016;27:43-59.
156. Hinderer C, Bell P, Louboutin JP et al. Neonatal Systemic AAV Induces Tolerance to CNS Gene
Therapy in MPS I Dogs and Nonhuman Primates. Mol Ther 2015;23:1298-1307.
157. Mingozzi F, Buning H. Adeno-Associated Viral Vectors at the Frontier between Tolerance and
Immunity. Front Immunol 2015;6:120.
158. Grimm D, Lee JS, Wang L et al. In vitro and in vivo gene therapy vector evolution via
multispecies interbreeding and retargeting of adeno-associated viruses. J Virol 2008;82:5887-5911.
159. Koerber JT, Jang JH, Schaffer DV. DNA shuffling of adeno-associated virus yields functionally
diverse viral progeny. Mol Ther 2008;16:1703-1709.
160. Maheshri N, Koerber JT, Kaspar BK et al. Directed evolution of adeno-associated virus yields
enhanced gene delivery vectors. Nat Biotechnol 2006;24:198-204.
161. Grieger JC, Samulski RJ. Adeno-associated virus vectorology, manufacturing, and clinical
applications. Methods Enzymol 2012;507:229-254.
162. LeWitt PA, Rezai AR, Leehey MA et al. AAV2-GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson's
disease: a double-blind, sham-surgery controlled, randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 2011;10:309-319.
163. Mittermeyer G, Christine CW, Rosenbluth KH et al. Long-term evaluation of a phase 1 study
of AADC gene therapy for Parkinson's disease. Hum Gene Ther 2012;23:377-381.
164. Marks WJ, Jr., Ostrem JL, Verhagen L et al. Safety and tolerability of intraputaminal delivery
of CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus serotype 2-neurturin) to patients with idiopathic Parkinson's
disease: an open-label, phase I trial. Lancet Neurol 2008;7:400-408.
165. Bartus RT, Baumann TL, Siffert J et al. Safety/feasibility of targeting the substantia nigra with
AAV2-neurturin in Parkinson patients. Neurology 2013;80:1698-1701.
166. Broekman ML, Tierney LA, Benn C et al. Mechanisms of distribution of mouse betagalactosidase in the adult GM1-gangliosidosis brain. Gene Ther 2009;16:303-308.
167. Sargeant TJ, Wang S, Bradley J et al. Adeno-associated virus-mediated expression of betahexosaminidase prevents neuronal loss in the Sandhoff mouse brain. Hum Mol Genet 2011;20:43714380.
168. Lin D, Fantz CR, Levy B et al. AAV2/5 vector expressing galactocerebrosidase ameliorates CNS
disease in the murine model of globoid-cell leukodystrophy more efficiently than AAV2. Mol Ther
2005;12:422-430.

Page 30 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

30
169. Macauley SL, Wong AM, Shyng C et al. An Anti-Neuroinflammatory That Targets Dysregulated
Glia Enhances the Efficacy of CNS-Directed Gene Therapy in Murine Infantile Neuronal Ceroid
Lipofuscinosis. J Neurosci 2014;34:13077-13082.
170. Sondhi D, Scott EC, Chen A et al. Partial correction of the CNS lysosomal storage defect in a
mouse model of juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis by neonatal CNS administration of an adenoassociated virus serotype rh.10 vector expressing the human CLN3 gene. Hum Gene Ther
2014;25:223-239.
171. Passini MA, Dodge JC, Bu J et al. Intracranial delivery of CLN2 reduces brain pathology in a
mouse model of classical late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. J Neurosci 2006;26:1334-1342.
172. Winner LK, Beard H, Hassiotis S et al. A pre-clinical study evaluating AAVrh10-based gene
therapy for Sanfilippo syndrome. Hum Gene Ther 2016.
173. Heldermon CD, Ohlemiller KK, Herzog ED et al. Therapeutic efficacy of bone marrow
transplant, intracranial AAV-mediated gene therapy, or both in the mouse model of MPS IIIB. Mol
Ther 2010;18:873-880.
174. Heldermon CD, Qin EY, Ohlemiller KK et al. Disease correction by combined neonatal
intracranial AAV and systemic lentiviral gene therapy in Sanfilippo Syndrome type B mice. Gene Ther
2013.
175. Liu G, Chen YH, He X et al. Adeno-associated virus type 5 reduces learning deficits and
restores glutamate receptor subunit levels in MPS VII mice CNS. Mol Ther 2007;15:242-247.
176. Cearley CN, Wolfe JH. A single injection of an adeno-associated virus vector into nuclei with
divergent connections results in widespread vector distribution in the brain and global correction of a
neurogenetic disease. J Neurosci 2007;27:9928-9940.
177. Piguet F, Sondhi D, Piraud M et al. Correction of Brain Oligodendrocytes by AAVrh.10
Intracerebral Gene Therapy in Metachromatic Leukodystrophy Mice. Hum Gene Ther 2012;23:903914.
178. Passini MA, Bu J, Fidler JA et al. Combination brain and systemic injections of AAV provide
maximal functional and survival benefits in the Niemann-Pick mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2007;104:9505-9510.
179. Bradbury AM, Cochran JN, McCurdy VJ et al. Therapeutic Response in Feline Sandhoff Disease
Despite Immunity to Intracranial Gene Therapy. Mol Ther 2013.
180. Colle MA, Piguet F, Bertrand L et al. Efficient intracerebral delivery of AAV5 vector encoding
human ARSA in non-human primate. Hum Mol Genet 2010;19:147-158.
181. Zerah M, Piguet F, Colle MA et al. Intracerebral gene therapy using AAVrh.10-hARSA
recombinant vector to treat patients with early-onset forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy:
preclinical feasibility and safety assessments in non-human primates. Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev 2015.
182. Sondhi D, Johnson L, De B et al. Long Term Expression and Safety of Administration of
AAVrh.10hCLN2 to the Brain of Rats and Non-human Primates for the Treatment of Late Infantile
Neuronal Lipofuscinosis. Hum Gene Ther Methods 2012.
183. Ciron C, Cressant A, Roux F et al. Human alpha-iduronidase gene transfer mediated by adenoassociated virus types 1, 2, and 5 in the brain of nonhuman primates: vector diffusion and
biodistribution. Hum Gene Ther 2009;20:350-360.
184. Wolf DA, Lenander AW, Nan Z et al. Direct gene transfer to the CNS prevents emergence of
neurologic disease in a murine model of mucopolysaccharidosis type I. Neurobiol Dis 2011;43:123133.
185. Fu H, DiRosario J, Kang L et al. Restoration of central nervous system alpha-Nacetylglucosaminidase activity and therapeutic benefits in mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB mice by a
single intracisternal recombinant adeno-associated viral type 2 vector delivery. J Gene Med
2010;12:624-633.
186. Hironaka K, Yamazaki Y, Hirai Y et al. Enzyme replacement in the CSF to treat metachromatic
leukodystrophy in mouse model using single intracerebroventricular injection of self-complementary
AAV1 vector. Sci Rep 2015;5:13104.

Page 31 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

31
187. Yamazaki Y, Hirai Y, Miyake K et al. Targeted gene transfer into ependymal cells through
intraventricular injection of AAV1 vector and long-term enzyme replacement via the CSF. Sci Rep
2014;4:5506.
188. Spampanato C, De Leonibus E, Dama P et al. Efficacy of a combined intracerebral and
systemic gene delivery approach for the treatment of a severe lysosomal storage disorder. Mol Ther
2011;19:860-869.
189. Rafi MA, Rao HZ, Luzi P et al. Extended Normal Life After AAVrh10-mediated Gene Therapy in
the Mouse Model of Krabbe Disease. Mol Ther 2012.
190. Polito VA, Cosma MP. IDS crossing of the blood-brain barrier corrects CNS defects in MPSII
mice. Am J Hum Genet 2009;85:296-301.
191. Jung SC, Park ES, Choi EN et al. Characterization of a novel mucopolysaccharidosis type II
mouse model and recombinant AAV2/8 vector-mediated gene therapy. Mol Cells 2010;30:13-18.
192. Duncan FJ, Naughton BJ, Zaraspe K et al. Broad functional correction of molecular
impairments by systemic delivery of scAAVrh74-hSGSH gene delivery in MPS IIIA mice. Mol Ther
2015;23:638-647.
193. McCarty DM, DiRosario J, Gulaid K et al. Mannitol-facilitated CNS entry of rAAV2 vector
significantly delayed the neurological disease progression in MPS IIIB mice. Gene Ther 2009;16:13401352.
194. Hinderer C, Bell P, Gurda BL et al. Liver-directed gene therapy corrects cardiovascular lesions
in feline mucopolysaccharidosis type I. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2014;111:14894-14899.
195. Murrey DA, Naughton BJ, Duncan FJ et al. Feasibility and safety of systemic rAAV9-hNAGLU
delivery for treating mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB: toxicology, biodistribution, and immunological
assessments in primates. Hum Gene Ther Clin Dev 2014;25:72-84.
196. Rockwell HE, McCurdy VJ, Eaton SC et al. AAV-mediated gene delivery in a feline model of
Sandhoff disease corrects lysosomal storage in the central nervous system. ASN Neuro 2015;7.
197. Gray-Edwards HL, Brunson BL, Holland M et al. Mucopolysaccharidosis-like phenotype in
feline Sandhoff disease and partial correction after AAV gene therapy. Mol Genet Metab 2015.
198. Fu H, Kang L, Jennings JS et al. Significantly increased lifespan and improved behavioral
performances by rAAV gene delivery in adult mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB mice. Gene Ther
2007;14:1065-1077.
199. Elliger SS, Elliger CA, Lang C et al. Enhanced secretion and uptake of beta-glucuronidase
improves adeno-associated viral-mediated gene therapy of mucopolysaccharidosis type VII mice. Mol
Ther 2002;5:617-626.
200. Kiyota T, Yamamoto M, Schroder B et al. AAV1/2-mediated CNS gene delivery of dominantnegative CCL2 mutant suppresses gliosis, beta-amyloidosis, and learning impairment of APP/PS1
mice. Mol Ther 2009;17:803-809.
201. Saal KA, Koch JC, Tatenhorst L et al. AAV.shRNA-mediated downregulation of ROCK2
attenuates degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in toxin-induced models of Parkinson's disease in
vitro and in vivo. Neurobiol Dis 2015;73:150-162.
202. Alto LT, Chen X, Ruhn KA et al. AAV-dominant negative tumor necrosis factor (DN-TNF) gene
transfer to the striatum does not rescue medium spiny neurons in the YAC128 mouse model of
Huntington's disease. PLoS One 2014;9:e96544.
203. Boudreau RL, McBride JL, Martins I et al. Nonallele-specific silencing of mutant and wild-type
huntingtin demonstrates therapeutic efficacy in Huntington's disease mice. Mol Ther 2009;17:10531063.
204. Connor B, Sun Y, von Hieber D et al. AAV1/2-mediated BDNF gene therapy in a transgenic rat
model of Huntington's disease. Gene Ther 2016;23:283-295.
205. Klein RL, Hirko AC, Meyers CA et al. NGF gene transfer to intrinsic basal forebrain neurons
increases cholinergic cell size and protects from age-related, spatial memory deficits in middle-aged
rats. Brain Res 2000;875:144-151.

Page 32 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

32
206. McBride JL, Pitzer MR, Boudreau RL et al. Preclinical safety of RNAi-mediated HTT
suppression in the rhesus macaque as a potential therapy for Huntington's disease. Mol Ther
2011;19:2152-2162.
207. Emborg ME, Carbon M, Holden JE et al. Subthalamic glutamic acid decarboxylase gene
therapy: changes in motor function and cortical metabolism. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2007;27:501509.
208. Stoica L, Todeasa SH, Cabrera GT et al. Adeno-associated virus-delivered artificial microRNA
extends survival and delays paralysis in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model. Ann Neurol
2016;79:687-700.
209. Wang H, Yang B, Qiu L et al. Widespread spinal cord transduction by intrathecal injection of
rAAV delivers efficacious RNAi therapy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet
2014;23:668-681.
210. Mussche S, Devreese B, Nagabhushan Kalburgi S et al. Restoration of cytoskeleton
homeostasis after gigaxonin gene transfer for giant axonal neuropathy. Hum Gene Ther 2013;24:209219.
211. Borel F, Gernoux G, Cardozo B et al. Therapeutic rAAVrh10 Mediated SOD1 Silencing in Adult
SOD1(G93A) Mice and Nonhuman Primates. Hum Gene Ther 2016;27:19-31.
212. Dufour BD, Smith CA, Clark RL et al. Intrajugular vein delivery of AAV9-RNAi prevents
neuropathological changes and weight loss in Huntington's disease mice. Mol Ther 2014;22:797-810.
213. Franz CK, Federici T, Yang J et al. Intraspinal cord delivery of IGF-I mediated by adenoassociated virus 2 is neuroprotective in a rat model of familial ALS. Neurobiol Dis 2009;33:473-481.
214. Sorensen AT, Nikitidou L, Ledri M et al. Hippocampal NPY gene transfer attenuates seizures
without affecting epilepsy-induced impairment of LTP. Exp Neurol 2009;215:328-333.
215. Noe F, Pool AH, Nissinen J et al. Neuropeptide Y gene therapy decreases chronic spontaneous
seizures in a rat model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Brain 2008;131:1506-1515.
216. Haberman R, Criswell H, Snowdy S et al. Therapeutic liabilities of in vivo viral vector tropism:
adeno-associated virus vectors, NMDAR1 antisense, and focal seizure sensitivity. Mol Ther
2002;6:495-500.
217. Storek B, Reinhardt M, Wang C et al. Sensory neuron targeting by self-complementary AAV8
via lumbar puncture for chronic pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008;105:1055-1060.

Illustration of routes of administration targeting the CNS by direct injection into the parenchyma or
injection into the CSF via intracerebroventricular or intrathecal (cisternal or lombar) routes.

Page 33 of 39

Speed 3,
3
Dose Volume
IS Stat
µL/min 5
3
3,6
max vg
µL
us
3

3

WM (n=6)
Can
Phase I
WM (n=12) LINCF Phase I
WM (n=12) LINCF Phase I/II
WM (n=12) MPSIIIA Phase I/II
WM(n=12)/
MPSIIIB Phase I/II
Cer (n=4)
WM (n=12) MLD Phase I/II
StN (n=2)
Par
Phase II
Str (n=4)
Par
Phase I
Phase
Put (n=8)
Par
I&II
Put (n=6)/
Par Phase I/II
SN (n=4)
Str (n=2)
Par
Phase I
Str (n=2)
Par
Phase I
Put (n=4)
Par Phase I/II
Put (n=2)
Par
Phase I
NBM
Alz
Phase I
(n=4/6)

11

13
11
16
4

2
2
rh10
rh10

ASP
CLN2
CLN2
SGSH

NSE
CAG
CAG
PGK

9.10
12
12
1,8.10 - 3,2.10
11
11
2,85.10 - 9.10
11
7,2.10

4

5

NAGLU

PGK

4.10

CAG
CAG
CMV

12

5
16
10

rh10
2
2

70

2

57

2

24
10
6
10

2
2
NA
2

10

2

ARSA
GAD
AADC
NTN
(CERE-120)

NTN
(CERE-120)

GDNF
AADC
AADC
AADC
NGF
(CERE-110)

NGF

12
12

1.10 - 4.10
12
2.10
10
11
9.10 - 3.10

3

Ref

3

15

900
600
1800
720

2
2
2
0,5

NA
NA
NA
Y

C
C
O
C

NA
NCT00151216
NCT01414985
NCT01474343

960

0,5

Y

O

ISRCTN19853672

NA

NA
70
200

NA NA
0,23 NA
1
N

O
C
C

NCT01801709
NCT00643890
NCT00229736
NCT00252850
NCT00400634

NA

17

NA
16

162
163
106,

CAG

1,3.10 - 5,4.10

11

11

80

2

NA

C

CAG

9,4.10 - 2.4.10

11

12

360

2/3

NA

O

NCT00985517

165

NA
NA
3
NA

NA
NA
NA
NA

O
O
O
O

NCT01621581
NCT01973543
NCT02418598
NCT01395641

NA
NA
NA
NA

40/80

2

NA

C

NCT00087789

79

NA

NA

NA NA

NCT00876863

NA

NA

NA

NA

O

NCT02362438

NA

NA

NA

NA

O

NCT02725580

NA

NA

NA

NA

O

NCT02122952

NA

NA

NA

NA

O

NCT02716246

NA

10

12

CMV
9.10 - 3.10
NA
11
12
NA 7,5.10 - 1,5.10
NA
11
11
NA
3.10 - 9.10
200/600
NA
NA
NA
10

CAG

1,2.10 - 1,2.10

CAG

2.10

11

11

NA

Alz

Phase II

25

2

NA

GAN

Phase I

20

9

Gigaxonin

JeT

NA

Lom

CLN6

Phase I/II

6

9

CLN6

CAG

1,5.10 vg/kg

(CERE-110)

Identifier

164

IT

7

Intraparenchymal

Injection Disease Clinical Inclu- SeroPromo Dose
1
2
3 Transgene
3,4
site
trial
sion type
-ter
min vg

13

13

SMA I Phase I/II

15

9

SMN

CAG

PeV

MPSIIIA Phase I/II

9

9

SGSH

U1a

8

PeV
IV

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

33

1

6,7.10 - 3,3.10
vg/kg
12
13
5.10 - 1.10
vg/kg

14

WM: White Matter; Cer: Cerebellum; StN: Subthalamique nucleus; Str: Striatum; Put: Putamen; SN:
2
Substancia Nigra; NBM: Nucleus Basalis of Meynert; Lom: Lombar; PeV: Peripheral vein; Can: Canavan; Par:
Parkinson; Alz: Alzheimer; GAN: Giant Axonal Neuropathy; CLN6: Batten CLN6 disease; SMA I: Spinal Muscular
3
4
5
Atrophy type I; NA = not available; The CAG promoter designation includes the CBA and CB promoter; IS:
6
7
8
Immunosupressor; Y= Yes; N=No; O=Ongoing; C=Completed; IT: Intrathecal; IV: Intravenous.

Page 34 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

34
Promoter Dose min Dose Volume
2,3
vg
max vg
µL
10
10
Tha/DCN or Hip
GM1
1
BGAL
CAG
4.10 -7,2x10
4/1
9
10
Str
GM2
2
HEX
NA
9,9.10 -1,4x10
3
7
Cor/ Hip/ Tha
GCL*
2/5
GALC
CAG
3,3.10
12
10
Cor/ Hth /Cer
INCL*
5
CLN1
CAG
1,2.10
12
10
Str/ Hip /Cer
JNCL*
rh10
CLN3
CAG
3.10
0,5
9
Tha/Cer
LINCL
2 or 5
CLN2
CAG
3,6.10
18
9
Str
MPS I
2 or 5
IDUA
PGK
1.10
5
9
Str
MPS IIIA
rh10
SGSH/SUMF1
PGK
7,5.10
2,5
9
Str
MPS IIIB
2 or 5
NAGLU
PGK
1.10
5
10
Cor/ Cer
MPS IIIB*
5
NAGLU
CAG
1,8.10
12
9
Str
MPS VII
5
GUSB
NA
2,4.10
5
10
10
Cor/Hip/Str
MPS VII 1;9 or rh10
GUSB
GUSB
1,2.10 - 1,3.10
1
9
10
Str or Cor
MLD
rh10
ARSA
CAG
2,3.10 - 5.10
1/2
Hip/Hth/Cor/
11
NPD
2
ASM
CMV
1,2.10
24
Str/Cer
11
13
Tha/ DCN
GM1
1 or rh8
BGAL
CAG
3.10 - 1,2.10
94
11
12
Tha
GM2
1 or rh8
HEX A
CAG
3.10 - 4,2.10
70
11
12
Str/WM
MPS I
5
IDUA
PGK
5.10 - 2,1.10
320
11
12
Str/WM
MPS IIIB
5
NAGLU
PGK
5.10 - 2,1.10
320
#
11
12
WM or Str/Tha
MLD
5
ARSA
PGK
3,8.10 - 1,9.10
120
#
11
12
WM
MLD
rh10
ARSA
CAG
2,2.10 - 1,1.10
360
#
12
12
WM
LINCL
rh10
CLN2
CAG
1,8.10 - 1,8.10
180
#
10
Str
MPS I
1 ; 2 or5
IDUA
PGK
1,4.10
100
10
ICV
MPS I*
8
IDUA
CAG
2.10
5
9
10
IT
MPSI
2
IDUA
CMV
2.10 - 4.10
50-100
9
10
CM
MPS IIIA
9
SGSH
CAG
5.10 - 5.10
5
10
10
ICV
MPS IIIA*
5
SGSH/SUMF1
CMV
1,2.10 - 6.10
2
10
CM
MPS IIIB
9
NAGLU
CAG
3.10
NA
10
10
CM
MPS IIIB
2
NAGLU
CMV
1.10 - 5.10
15
11
11
IT
MPS VII*
2
GUSB
CMV
1,5.10 - 5.10
30-100
10
ICV
MPS VII
4
GUSB
RSV
1.10
10
10
ICV
MPS VII*
1 ; 2 or5
GUSB
GUSB
1,8.10
4
10
ICV
GCL*
1
GALC
CMV
6.10
4
11
ICV
GM1*
1
BGAL
CAG
3,3.10
4
11
11
ICV
MLD
9 or 1
ARSA
CAG
1,1.10 - 2,3.10
20
11
ICV
MLD
1
ARSA
NA
2.10
20
10
ICV
MSD*
4 or 9
SUMF1
CMV
1,2.10
6
13
CM
AMD
1 or 9
MANB
GUSB
1.10
NA
12
CM
MPS I
9
IDUA
CMV/CAG
1.10 vg/kg
1mL
12
CM
MPS I
9
IDUA
CAG
1.10 vg/kg
1-2mL
#
13
CM
MPS IIIA
9
SGSH
CAG
2.10
1mL
#
12
CM
MPS IIIB
9
NAGLU
CAG
6,5.10
NA
12
CM
MPS VII
9 or rh10
GUSB
CAG
5.10 vg/kg
1-2mL
1 ;2 ;4 ;5 ;8
12
ICV
LINCL
CLN2
CAG
2.10
NA
or 9

Model Injection site

#

Mice
Dog
NHP
Mice
NHP

Dog

Disease

CM

MPSI

Mice

Rodent

Intravenous

Large animal

Cat

Intra-CSF

Rodent

Large animal

Cat

Intraparenchymal

Rodent

Page 35 of 39

1

TaV
TaV
TaV
TeV
JuV
TeV
TeV
TaV
TaV
NA
TaV

GM1
GM2
GCL*
GCL*
MLD*
MSD*
MPS II*
MPS II
MPS IIIA
MPS IIIA
MPS IIIB

Serotype

2

Transgene

12

9

IDUA

CAG

3.10 vg/kg

9
9
rh10
2/5
9
4 or 9
5
8
rh74
9
9

BGAL
HEX
GALC
GALC
ARSA
SUMF1
IDS
IDS
SGSH
SGSH
NAGLU

CAG
NA
CAG
CAG
CAG
CMV
CMV
EF1α
U1a
CAG
CMV

1.10 - 3,0.10
13
3,5.10 vg/Kg
9
11
7,6.10 - 2.10
7
1,38.10
12
2.10
11
2.10
11
1.10
11
1.10
12
5.10 vg/Kg
12
1.10
13
1.10 vg/Kg

11

13

2

Speed
µL/min
0,2/0,1
NA
NA
NA
1
0,5
0,5
0,5
0,5
NA
0,5
0,5
0,2
0,5
2
2
2
2
3
0,5
1
NA
1
>5min
NA
NA
NA
<30sec
NA
0,5
NA
NA
NA
>10min
>10min
NA
NA
NA
NA
<10min
NA
>1min

Ref
38, 166
167
168
169
170
171
36
172
35
173, 174
175
176
177
178
39
179
37
37
180
181
182
183
184
55
49
45
50
185
54
46
42
44
43
186
187
188
51
53
156
49
50
52

>25min

47

1-2mL

NA

156

200
100
25/10
100
100
100
NA
200
150-200
200
150-200

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA

61
62
58, 189
168
57
188
190
191
192
60
59

MPS IIIB
MPS VII

2
9

NAGLU
GUSB

CMV
NA

4.10
12
1.10

100-150
NA

NA
NA

193

Dog Cat

CeV

MPS I

8

IDUA

TBG

5.10 vg/Kg

12

1mL

NA

194

CeV

MPS VII*

9 or rh10

GUSB

CAG

2.10 vg/Kg

13

1-2 mL

> 2min

52

NHP

CeV

MPS IIIB

9

NAGLU

CMV

1.10 - 2.10 vg/Kg

5mL

NA

195

Cat

Tha/ICV

GM2

rh8

HEX

CAG

8.10 - 1.10

12

340

2 or 15

TeV/ICV
TaV/CM
TeV/IT

MSD*
MPS IIIB
MPS VII*

4 or 9
2
2

SUMF1
NAGLU
GUSB

CMV
CMV
CMV

10

11

1,2.10 -2.10
10
11
5.10 - 4.10
10
11
3.10 - 4.10

103
5-20
NA

NA
> 2 min
NA

188

Mice

Large

TaV
NA

Dog

Large model
1

Large Rodent

IP & CSF
IV & CSF

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

35

CeV/CM

MPS VII*

9 or rh10

GUSB

CAG

2,8.10 -2.10 vg/Kg 1-2mL

> 2 min

52

#

11

13

13

11

12

13

63

196

Tha:Thalamus; Hth: Hypothalamus; DCN: Deep Cerebellar Nuclei; Hip: Hippocampus; Str: striatum; Cor: Cortex;
Cer:Cerebellum; WM: White Matter; ICV: Intracerebroventricular; CM: Cisterna Magna; TaV: Tail Vein; TeV: Temporal Vein ;
2
3
JuV: Jugular Vein ; CeV: Cephalic vein ; IT: Intrathecal ; IP: Intraparenchymal ; NA : not available ; The CAG promoter
#
designation includes the CBA and CB promoters; The study was performed using wild type model of the animal in order to
study the AAV for the disease mentioned ;* Newborn animals.

197

198
199

Page 36 of 39

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

36
Model

Mice

Rat

Intraparenchymal

Rodent

Mice

Page 37 of 39

3

3

Disea- SeroPromoter Dose
Dose
3
3
Transgene
Vol µL
2
34
se
type
,
min vg max vg
 Disease affecting the CNS
Hip/ Cor
Alz 5 or 9
NEP/IDE
NA
NA
NA
9
Hip/ Cor
Alz
5
ECE
CAG
4.10
4
9
Hip/ Cor
Alz
2
ScFv59
CAG
2.10
8
9
Cor &/or Hip
Alz
5
CYP46A1
PGK
2,4.10
4
10
Hip
Alz
9
AAPsα
Synapsin
2.10
4
Hip
Alz
8
IGF-1/IGF-2
EF1α
NA
1
9
Hip
Alz
2/1
IL-10
NA
3.10
2
9
Hip
Alz
1/2
IL-4
NA
2.10
2
10
Hip
Alz
1/2
CCL2 mutant
CAG
2.10
2
10
Str/Hip/ SN
Par 2 or 5
GBA1/ α-Synuclein
Synapsin
2.10
10
9
SN
Par
2
Nurr1 &/or Foxa2
CMV
1.10
1
7
8
SN
Par
1/2 shRNA anti ROCK2 or LIMK1 Synapsin
2,5.10 – 1.10
1
9
Str
Par
2
NTN
CAG
4.10
4
10
10
Str
Hun
1
DN-TNF
CAG
2.10 - 4,2.10
6
10
Str
Hun
1
mRNAs anti-Htt
CAG
1,8.10
4
10
Str
Hun
1
mRNAs anti-Htt
mU6
4.10
10
9
Str
Hun
2
NTN
CAG
4.10
4
9
Str
Hun
2
CNTF
CAG
2,7.10
1
10
Str/Cer
Hun
1
shHD2.1
CMV
6.10
12
9
Str
Hun
1/2
ZF11xHunt
CAG
4,4.10
6
5 or
CAG or
9
Str
Hun
shCYP46A1
6.10
4
rh10
PU6
9
Str
Hun
2
GDNF
CAG
4.10
4
8
9
Str
Hun*
2
BDNF
CAG
8.10 -8.10
5
9
Str
Hun* 1/2
BDNF
CAG
4.10
4
10
Str
Hun
2
GDNF
CAG
1,2.10
4
9
Str
Hun* 1/2
HD70/HD20/HDh8/shHD2
NSE
3.0
3
9
Med sep
Alz
NA
NGF
NSE
6.10
2
 Disease affecting the spinal cord

Injection site

DCN

1

ALS

1 or 2

3

Speed

µL/min

NA
0,5
1
0,2
0,2
0,2
NA
NA
NA
1
0,66
0,5
0,2
0,5
0,5
NA
2
0,5
0,25
0,25

Ref
68-70
69
70
87, 88
76
81
82
83
200
93
94
201
102
202
117
203
113
114
116
119

0,2

120

0,2
0,15
NA
0,5
0,1
NA

112

0,5

125

6,8.10
68
11
3,6.10
180
11
9,9.10
150
10
11
8,3.10 - 8,3.10 50-75
11
3.10
150
10
11
6.10 - 1,2.10
20
9
11
6.10 – 5.10
200
11
3.10
200
10
8,4.10
21

1
NA
NA
NA
2
NA
0,1-1
1
0,25

206

4.10

10

6

109
204
111
115
205

IGF-1

NA

siRNA
AADC
GDNF
GDNF
NTN
GAD
hAADC
hAADC-2
GDNF

U6
NA
CMV
CMV
CAG
NA
CMV
CMV
CAG

BDNF/ ΔB2Noggin

NA

3,7x10

9

3

NA

110

CAG

5.10
12
2,4.10
11
1,6.10 or
11
6,8.10
12
1,2.10 vg/Kg
10
10
4.10 - 8.10
10
7,2.10
12
13
2,7.10 - 3,3.10

10

2

NA

208

10
3

NA

127

8
20
10

NA
0,5
NA

209

5

NA

19

12
6

NA
NA

132

NPH

Disease affecting the CNS
Put
Hun*
1
Cau/Put
Par*
2
Put
Par*
2
Put/ SN
Par*
2
Cau/ Put
Par*
2
STN
Par*
NA
Put
Par*
2
Put
Par*
2
Str/SN
Par*
NA
 Disease affecting the CNS

Mice

Large animal



ICV

Mice

Rodent

La
rg
e
m
od
el

IntraCSF



Hun

4

Disease affecting the spinal cord
CVL
ALS
9
amiR SOD1
ICV

ALS

6 or 9

miRNA αSOD1

CMV or
GFAP

IT
ICV
CM

ALS
ALS
GAN

rh10
4
9

amiR-SOD1
IGF-1 or VEGF or IGF-1+VEGF
GAN

Pol II
Hb9
CMV

ICV

SMA

9

SMN

CAG

SMN
SMNI

CAG/GUSB
CAG

ICV
SMA
8
ICV
SMA
9
 Disease affecting the spinal cord

10

vg/Kg
10

10

5.10 -1,7.10
9
10
1.10 - 5.10

2
100
99
103
207
101
97
98

126
210

136

1500

NA

136

13

6000

NA

136

300

NA

211

50300

NA

212

NA
10
70
100
50
NA
200

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
>1min
NA

131

NA

NA

123

6

0,75

124

1

NA

128

VH
ALS
2
IGF-1
CAG
4,1.10
5
NA
Hip: Hippocampus; Str: Striatum; SN: Substancia Nigra; DCN: Deep Cerebellar Nuclei; VGM: Ventral gray matter; Put:
Putamen; Cau: Caudate; Cor: Cortex; Med Sep: Medial Septum; STN: Sub-Thalamique Nucleus; Ven: Ventricle; LC: lumbar
cord; CM: Cisterna magna; ICV: IntraCerebroVentricular; JuV : Jugular Vein; TaV: Tail Vein; FaV: Facial vein; TeV: Temporal
2
vein; Qua: Quadriceps; LSC: Lumbar Spinal Cord; VH: Ventral Horn; Alz: Alzheimer; Hun: Huntington; Par: Parkinson; GAN:
3
4
Giant Axonal Neuropathy; ALS: Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis; SMA: Spinal Muscular Atrophy; NA: Not available; The CAG
promoter designation includes the CB and CBA promoter; *The study was performed using wild type model of the animal in
order to study the disease mentioned

213

NHP

Pig

12

IT

SMA*

9

SMNI

CAG

3.10

CM/IT

SMA*

9

SMNI

CAG

2,5.10

IT

ALS*

rh10

miR SOD1

U6/CAG

6.10 vg/kg

HTT-specific RNAi

U6

6,3.10 – 3.10

CAG
CMV
PGK
CAG
CAG
SYN1
U6/CAG

5.10
11
1.10
10
4,5.10
11
5.10
14
3,3.10 vg/kg
11
12
1,5.10 - 2,1.10
11
2.10

NA

4.10 - 3.10

CAG

4,8.10

CAG

NA



Hun

9

11

12

Mice

Mice

Mice

 Disease affecting the spinal cord
FaV
SMA
9
SMN
FaV
SMA
9
SMN
TeV
SMA
9
SMN
FaV
SMA
9
SMN
NA
SMA
9
SMN
TaV
ALS
9
ADAR2
TaV
ALS rh10
miR SOD1
 Disease affecting the spinal cord
IGF-1
Qua
ALS
2
GDNF
 Disease affecting the spinal cord
VGM
ALS
2
IGF-1
LSC
Rat

Rodent model
Rodent model Rodent

Intravenous
Intramuscular
1

12

Disease affecting the CNS
JuV

Intra SP

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

37

ALS

2

IL-10

11

7

10

10

10

133
134
135
19
130
211

Page 38 of 39

Epilepsy

Hip
Hip
Hip
Pir Cor
Hip
Inf Col

Mice
Rat
Rat

Rodent
Rodent

Intra-CSF

Hip

2

3

Dose min Dose max Volume

Transgene

Promoter

8

ADK

gfaABC1D

2.10

Epilepsy
Epilepsy
Epilepsy
Epilepsy
Epilepsy

1 and 2
1
2
2
1/2 or 2

NSE
CAG
CAG
CAG
NSE

Epilepsy

NA

NPY
NPY
GDNF
NPY
NPY
FIB-GAL or
GAL

CMV

1,75.10 -1.10

Inf Col
Epilepsy
or Temp Cor
Neuropathic pain (NP)



1

Serotype

Mice
Rodent

Intraparenchymal



Disease

Rat

Injection
1
site
Epilepsy

Model

Intra SP

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.

38

vg

vg

Ref

µL

µL/min

9

2

1

143

6.10
10
6,2.10
9
9
4,1.10 - 6,3.10
10
10
1,2.10 - 1,3.10
9
10
6,4.10 - 1,3.10

10

6
12
3 or 6
4
6 or 12

0,2
1
0,2
NA
NA

214

7

1

>9 min

141

9

1

>9 min

216

13

10

>2min

148

11

5

NA

147

10

15

>1min

217

9

2

>5min

145

2

0,4

146

1

>2min

144

NA

NRIA or PINA

CMV

1.10

shRNA anti
TRPV1

hU6

2.10

NA

3,5.10

CMV

3.10

9

IT

Chronic NP

9

IT

Diabetic NP

5

IT

Chronic NP

8

DRG

Chronic NP

6

CBD3

CMV

5.10

DRG

Chronic NP

2

shRNA anti
Nav1.3

hU6

2,7.10 - 1,4.10

SGM

Chronic NP

NA

BDNF

CMV

5.10 IU

shRNA anti
Nav1.3
ppβEP and/or
IL-10

2

Speed

10

5

11

Hip: Hippocampus; Pir Cor: Piriform Cortex; Inf Col: Inferior Colliculus; Temp Cor: Temporal Cortex; DRG: Dorsal Root
2
3
Ganglion; SGM: Spinal Gray Matter; NA = not available; The CAG promoter designation includes the CBA promoter

215
142
139
138

Human Gene Therapy
AAV based gene therapy for CNS diseases (doi: 10.1089/hum.2016.087)
This article has been peer-reviewed and accepted for publication, but has yet to undergo copyediting and proof correction. The final published version may differ from this proof.
Page 39 of 39

39

Figure 1

