Experimental Neurology 166, 127–135 (2000)
doi:10.1006/exnr.2000.7483, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on

Reduced BDNF mRNA Expression in the Parkinson’s Disease
Substantia Nigra
D. W. Howells,* ,† M. J. Porritt,* ,† J. Y. F. Wong,* ,† P. E. Batchelor,* ,† R. Kalnins,‡
A. J. Hughes,† and G. A. Donnan†
*Department of Medicine and †Department of Neurology, University of Melbourne, Austin and Repatriation Medical Centre, and
‡Department of Anatomical Pathology, Austin and Repatriation Medical Centre, Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia
Received November 4, 1999; accepted March 29, 2000

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has potent effects on survival and morphology of dopaminergic neurons and thus its loss could contribute to death
of these cells in Parkinson’s disease (PD). In situ hybridization revealed that BDNF mRNA is strongly expressed by dopaminergic neurons in control substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). In clinically and neuropathologically typical PD, SNpc BDNF mRNA
expression is reduced by 70% (P ⴝ 0.001). This reduction is due, in part, to loss of dopaminergic neurons
which express BDNF. However, surviving dopaminergic neurons in the PD SNpc also expressed less BDNF
mRNA (20%, P ⴝ 0.02) than their normal counterparts.
Moreover, while 15% of control neurons had BDNF
mRNA expression >1 SD below the control mean,
twice as many (28%) of the surviving PD SNpc dopaminergic neurons had BDNF mRNA expression below
this value. This 13% difference in proportions (95% CI
8 –17%, P < 0.000001) indicates the presence of a subset
of neurons in PD with particularly low BDNF mRNA
expression. Moreover, both control and PD neurons
displayed a direct relationship between the density of
BDNF mRNA expression per square micrometer of cell
surface and neuronal size (r 2 ⴝ 0.93, P < 0.00001)
which was lost only in PD neurons expressing the
lowest levels of BDNF mRNA. If BDNF is an autocrine/
paracrine factor for SNpc dopaminergic neurons, loss
of BDNF-expressing neurons may compromise the
well-being of their surviving neighbors. Moreover,
neurons expressing particularly low levels of BDNF
mRNA may be those at greatest risk of injury in PD
and possibly the trigger for the degeneration itself.
© 2000 Academic Press

Key Words: Parkinson’s disease; brain-derived neurotrophic factor; dopaminergic; in situ hybridization.

INTRODUCTION

Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD) is one of the
most common neurodegenerative disorders and affects
1% of people over the age of 65 years. While the patho-

logical changes are well described (11) and consist of a
defined pattern of Lewy body formation, neuronal loss
and gliosis in the mesodopaminergic nuclear complex,
and, most noticeably, loss of pigmented dopaminergic
substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) neurons, little
is known about the disease etiology.
One hypothesis that remains largely untested is that
reduced expression of one or a combination of the neurotrophic factors known to support the survival and
neurite outgrowth of dopaminergic neurons might contribute to the degeneration and death of these neurons
(2).
There are several neurotrophins and growth factors
with dopaminergic activity (30), most notably brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor (GDNF). However, while
both have potent effects on survival and neurite outgrowth from dopaminergic neurons (10, 13, 19, 23,
38 – 41, 44), GDNF is normally only expressed at very
low levels in adult brain (24) and no alteration of
expression has been detected in Parkinson’s disease
(18). Of all the factors with dopaminergic activity, only
BDNF is both a potent dopaminergic neurotrophin (19,
23, 38 – 41) and normally expressed in the adult nigrostriatal dopamine system (8, 43).
The potency of BDNF’s action on dopaminergic neurons is illustrated by examining its effects on animal
models of Parkinson’s disease. In cell culture, BDNF
enhances the survival of dopaminergic neurons and
protects them against the neurotoxic effects of both
MPP ⫹ and 6-OHDA (19, 39). Similarly, intrastriatal
injections of BDNF improve the apomorphine-induced
rotations that follow loss of nigral dopamine neurons
after 6-OHDA toxicity in rats (38) while nigral implantation of BDNF-secreting fibroblasts prevents the loss
of these neurons (23) and increases substantia nigra
dopamine levels after MPP ⫹ toxicity (9). Importantly,
intrathecal infusion of BDNF reduces loss of dopamine
neurons and ameliorates parkinsonism in the best
available model of Parkinson’s disease, the MPTPtreated monkey (41).

127

0014-4886/00 $35.00
Copyright © 2000 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

128

HOWELLS ET AL.

Induction of dopaminergic sprouting contributes to
these effects. BDNF promotes sprouting and neurite
outgrowth from cultures of human fetal dopaminergic
neurons (40), induces sprouting of a halo of dopaminergic axons when BDNF is injected into the striatum
(38), and enhances graft-derived reinnervation of denervated striatum (44). We have shown that dopaminergic sprouting also occurs after surgical injury to
mouse striatum (14) and that this sprouting is accompanied by induction of periwound expression of mRNA
for BDNF (43) by microglia which accumulate around
the wound (3).
Others have shown that mRNA for BDNF and its
receptor trkB are also both expressed in striatum (35,
43), substantia nigra, and ventral tegmental area (8,
27, 37) of adult rodents. BDNF immunohistochemistry
after colchicine treatment to inhibit axonal transport
causes accumulation of BDNF in the substantia nigra
and depletion in the striatum revealing that BDNF
produced in the substantia nigra is anterogradely
transported to the striatum (1). Moreover, in adult life
dopaminergic stimulation induced by oral administration of L-DOPA directly promotes the expression of
BDNF in the striatum (31). Therefore, one role for
BDNF may be to act as an autocrine/paracrine regulator of both striatal dopaminergic innervation and substantia nigra dopaminergic neuron survival.
A pilot study in 1998 first hinted that reduced BDNF
mRNA concentrations in substantia nigra might contribute to development of Parkinson’s disease (16).
More recently ELISA has demonstrated that the concentration of BDNF itself is reduced in the Parkinson’s
disease substantia nigra (29). Similarly, BDNF immunohistochemistry has shown that most mesencephalic
pigmented neurons are immunoreactive for BDNF
(32). However, neither study tells us how much BDNF
is being produced by each neuron. The aim of this study
was to use in situ hybridization to determine how much
BDNF mRNA is expressed by individual neurons in the
Parkinson’s disease substantia nigra and determine
whether reduced expression was likely to compromise
their well-being.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS

Patients
We have used in situ hybridization to examine the
expression of BDNF mRNA in the substantia nigra of
postmortem tissue from five patients with idiopathic
PD and five controls with no known neurological or
psychiatric disease. The two groups were not significantly different for age at death (PD, mean age 75
years, range 56 – 88 years; controls, mean age 73.5
years, range 58 –90 years) or postmortem (PM) delay
between death and tissue collection (PD, mean PM
delay 16.1 h, range 3.5–32.5 h; controls, mean PM

delay 14.6 h, range 3.5–23 h). Since tissue pH is believed to be critical for the success of in situ hybridization (21), 2-g blocks of tissue from the lateral cerebellar
hemisphere were collected from each patient and homogenized in 20 ml of distilled H 2O (pH 7.0) before
reading the pH at room temperature using a standard
pH meter. Cerebellar tissue was used because it is
thought to be unaffected by Parkinson’s disease and
provides a consistent proportion of gray and white matter (21). There was no difference in the tissue pH
between the control (mean 6.3, range 6.1– 6.6) and
Parkinson’s disease groups (mean 6.3, range 6.0 – 6.54).
The mean disease duration in the PD patients was
17.6 years (range 13–20 years) and L-DOPA treatment
had been given for an average of 11.5 years (range 7–16
years). The mean Hoehn and Yahr score at death was
3.6 (range 3– 4). All the PD patients satisfied accepted
clinical and neuropathological criteria for idiopathic
Parkinson’s diseases (11, 17, 42), diagnosed on the
basis of a progressive disorder with rigidity, bradykinesia and rest tremor, L-DOPA responsiveness, asymmetry of signs, and the absence of clinical features
characteristic of other causes of parkinsonism. All PD
patients had 40 – 60% loss of dopaminergic substantia
nigra neurons and Lewy bodies in the SNpc, locus
coeruleus, pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, dorsal
motor nucleus of the vagus, and nucleus basalis of
Meynert. None of the patients had changes which
would satisfy diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease or diffuse Lewy body disease.
Tissue Preparation
At autopsy, l-cm-thick coronal blocks of midbrain
were snap-frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen and stored at ⫺80°C. Serial 20-␮m sections were
then cut through the substantia nigra and sections at
the level of the red nucleus showing exiting third nerve
fibers were selected to allow analysis of a consistent
anatomical region.
In Situ Hybridization
In situ hybridization for dry film autoradiography
was performed on three to five replicate sections from
four of the PD and three of the control subjects using a
single 50-base oligonucleotide (43) end labeled with
[␥- 33P]ATP. Hybridization occurred at 42°C for 18 h in
350 ␮l of hybridization buffer placed on the section.
After washing in 1⫻ SSC at 55°C and drying, the
sections were exposed to Amersham Hyperfilm for 4
days. After autoradiography all sections were stained
with thionine for anatomical alignment. To allow quantitation of images on Amersham Hyperfilm, a series of
[␥- 33P]ATP standards were exposed to film together
with the brain sections and used as standards for densitometry. To estimate the extent of BDNF mRNA
expression over individual dopaminergic neurons in

REDUCED BDNF mRNA EXPRESSION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

the substantia nigra, in situ hybridization was performed on a single demelanized and counterstained
section from five PD and five control subjects using a
pair of [␥- 33P]ATP-labeled oligonucleotides corresponding to sequences 731– 685 and 575–527 of the human
BDNF sequence (20) for oligonucleotides 1 and 2,
respectively: Oligonucleotide 1, 5⬘-ATAGTAAGGGCCCGAACATACGATTGGGTAGTTCGGCATTGCGAGTTCCA-3⬘; and Oligonucleotide 2, 5⬘-TAGGACTGTGACCGTCCCGCCAGACATGTCCACTGCAGTCTTTTTATCTG-3⬘.
To demelanize the sections, the slides were first
soaked in 1% aqueous KMnO 4 for 5 min, rinsed in
dH 2O 1 min, and then incubated in 5% aqueous oxalic
acid (5–10 min) until only a faint brown stain was left
to delineate the cells when examined microscopically.
Autoradiography was then performed by coating the
sections in photographic emulsion (Amersham, LM-1
emulsion) and exposing for 3 weeks. The outline of each
neuron was defined manually and the circumference
was used to determine the cross-sectional area of each
cell using the Spatial Area option of the MCID suite of
software (Imaging Research Inc.) after calibration of
the system in the X and Y dimensions using a stage
micrometer. Silver grains were then counted automatically within these manually defined regions using the
MCID counting function after setting the target acceptance criteria to ignore objects larger or smaller than
the silver grains. To minimize the effects of variation in
emulsion thickness, a background grain count was
made one cell diameter away from each neuron using
each neurons own outline as a template. This background count was made either 0°, 90°, 180°, or 270°
from each neuron depending on where the first space
not occupied by a neighboring neuron was found. Silver
grains were counted over every SNpc neuron visible in
each section. The specificity of probe binding was assessed by examining the signal produced in the presence of an excess of unlabeled antisense oligonucleotides, when corresponding sense oligonucleotides were
used as the probes, and after RNase digestion of mRNA
in the sections. Statistical analysis was performed using Simstat for Windows (Provalis Research) and confidence interval analysis (BMJ).
RESULTS

Dry Film Autoradiography
On the dry film autoradiograms, a dark band indicating BDNF mRNA expression was found in the substantia nigra of control brains and was particularly
intense over the SNpc (Fig. lA). The expression of
BDNF in the control SNpc (434 ⫾ 42 cpm/mm 2,
mean ⫾ SEM) was more than three times greater (P ⫽
0.003) than expression in the red nucleus (130 ⫾
37cpm/mm 2) (Figs. lA and 1C).

129

FIG. 1. BDNF mRNA expression in control (n ⫽ 3) and PD (n ⫽
4) substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and red nucleus (RN). (A)
Dry film autoradiograph of control SNpc. (B) Dry film autoradiograph of PD SNpc. (C) Densitometry showing reduced BDNF mRNA
expression in PD SNpc but no change in red nucleus. All values are
means ⫾ SEM, *P ⫽ 0.001, t test assuming equal variance.

In patients with PD, the density of BDNF mRNA
expression in the red nucleus was the same as in the
controls (154 ⫾ 63 cpm/mm 2). However, while some
BDNF expression was still detected over the SNpc (Fig.
1B), the level of expression (125 ⫾ 33 cpm/mm 2) was
approximately 30% (P ⫽ 0.001) of that seen in the
controls (434 ⫾ 42 cpm/mm 2) (Fig. 1C).
Corresponding sense oligonucleotides produced no
specific signal over the SNpc. Performing the in situ
hybridization in the presence of an excess of unlabeled
antisense oligonucleotides inhibited binding of the radiolabeled probes to dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc
while RNase digestion of mRNA in the section abolished the signal.
Emulsion Dipped Autoradiography
Qualitative emulsion dipped autoradiography revealed that all pigmented neurons in the substantia
nigra of both controls and Parkinson’s disease patients
expressed BDNF mRNA (Figs. 2A and 2B). Because
the neuromelanin present in the pigmented dopaminergic neurons interfered with counting silver grains
on both bight field (Fig. 2C) and dark field microscopy
(Fig. 2 B), subsequent quantitative analysis was performed on demelanized sections (Fig. 2D).
After demelanization and lightly counterstaining,
every neuron detected in a single section through the
substantia nigra at the level of the red nucleus and
exiting third nerve of the five PD and five control
subjects was examined. Silver grains were counted
over a total of 539 and 906 neurons from PD and
control subjects, respectively. There was no difference
in the mean cross-sectional neuronal areas sampled
from each group of subjects (mean ⫾ SEM; PD 946 ⫾ 9
␮m 2, control 965 ⫾ 8 ␮m 2, P ⫽ 0.23). In the surviving
dopaminergic neurons in the PD brains, the mean
number of silver grains due to BDNF mRNA expres-

130

HOWELLS ET AL.

FIG. 2. Photomicrographs showing BDNF mRNA expression by pigmented neurons in the human substantia nigra. (A) Bright field
Nissl-stained section of control substantia nigra showing neuromelanin-containing dopaminergic neurons. (B) Dark field image of A showing
clustering of silver grains dopaminergic neurons. (C) High magnification image of pigmented dopaminergic neurons showing clustering of
silver grains around cells and masking of silver grains by neuromelanin. (D) Sliver grains due to BDNF mRNA expression over demelanized
dopaminergic neurons. Bar: 500 ␮m for A and B; 50 ␮m for C and D.

sion (mean ⫾ SEM, 61 ⫾ 2.6) was 20% lower (P ⫽
0.02, two-sample t test assuming unequal variances)
than in the control brains (76.1 ⫾ 5.6) (Fig. 3B).
Examination of the distribution of BDNF mRNA expression in every dopaminergic neuron sampled revealed the presence of a population of dopaminergic
neurons in the PD group with particularly low levels of
BDNF mRNA expression. Twenty-eight percent of PD
neurons but only 15% of the control neurons had BDNF
mRNA expression more than 1 SD below the mean of
the control group (42 grains/neuron). This difference in
proportions 13% (CI 7.8 –16.7%), which cannot merely

FIG. 3. Number of pigmented neurons and BDNF mRNA expression by pigmented neurons in a single section from each of five
control and five PD brains. (A) Mean number of neurons/section
examined in each group. (B) Mean BDNF mRNA expression (silver
grains/neuron). All values are means ⫾ SEM, *P ⫽ 0.02, t test
assuming equal variance.

be attributed to the presence of a population of particularly small neurons, is highly significant (Z ⫽ 6.12,
P ⱕ 0.000001) (Figs. 4A and 4B).
Examining the proportion of neurons expressing different ranges of BDNF mRNA revealed a consistent
loss of neurons expressing moderate to high levels of
BDNF mRNA in the PD SNpc (Fig. 5). However, there
was relatively little change in the number of neurons
expressing lower levels of BDNF mRNA (25– 49 silver
grains/neuron, Z ⫽ 4.49, P ⱕ 0.001) and an increase
in the number expressing the lowest levels of BDNF
mRNA (0 –24 silver grains/neuron, Z ⫽ 2.86, P ⱕ
0.01).
Plotting the level of BDNF mRNA expression
against the cross-sectional area of each neuron (Fig.
6A) revealed that PD neurons expressing a particular
level of BDNF mRNA were generally the same size as
their control counterparts. This was not true for the PD
neurons expressing particularly low levels of BDNF
mRNA; these neurons were significantly larger than
expected (P ⱕ 0.05). Correcting the silver grain counts
for sampling area (Fig. 6B) exposed a direct relationship between the density of BDNF mRNA expression
per square micrometer of cell surface and the size of
dopaminergic neurons in both the control and the PD
SNpc (r 2 ⫽ 0.93, P ⱕ 0.00001). This relationship was
lost for the PD neurons expressing the lowest levels of
BDNF mRNA (0 –24 silver grains/neuron) which had a
BDNF mRNA density (silver grains/␮m 2) 30% lower
than the equivalent neurons in the control group (P ⱕ
0.0001).

REDUCED BDNF mRNA EXPRESSION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

131

FIG. 4. BDNF mRNA expression (silver grains/neuron) plotted against sample area (␮m 2) for (A) PD and (B) control neurons. Means ⫾
1 SD for control grain number and area are overlaid on both graphs. The proportion of neurons with grain number lower than 1 SD below
control mean are indicated, *P ⱕ 0.000001, comparison of proportions.

DISCUSSION

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor has potent effects
of the survival and neurite outgrowth from mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons (9, 19, 23, 38 – 40, 43, 44).
Moreover, BDNF is believed to act as an paracrine/
autocrine factor for these neurons since in animals it is
both produced and used by nigral dopaminergic neurons (8, 31, 27, 35, 37, 43) with the BDNF protein
actively transported to dopaminergic terminals in the
striatum (1). Loss of BDNF mRNA expression might

FIG. 5. Number and frequency of pigmented neurons within
different ranges of BDNF mRNA expression (silver grains/neuron).
Bars indicate total number from all subjects per range; lines indicate
frequency. Closed bars and data points, PD; open bars and data
points, controls. *P ⱕ 0.01, **P ⱕ 0.001, comparison of proportions.

therefore reduce the function and survival of nigral
dopaminergic neurons and contribute to the etiology of
PD. The reduced neurite outgrowth and later cell death
that would be expected in a BDNF deficiency fits well
with the observations that loss of striatal dopamine
(⬃70 – 80%) (5) is frequently more pronounced than
loss of nigral dopamine neurons (⬃50%) (26). These
observations also suggest that in PD, surviving substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons are not mounting
the exuberant collateral sprouting response that animal models of PD and striatal injury suggest they are
capable of (6, 7, 14, 15, 33, 34). However these surviving dopaminergic neurons can sprout after the injury
associated with striatal transplantation of adrenal
medullary cells even in the late stages of PD (12, 22). In
animals, this injury-induced sprouting response is associated with increased striatal production of BDNF
(43). In this context it is worth noting that expression
of trkB, the BDNF receptor, is intact in the Parkinson’s
disease substantia nigra (4). This may explain the continued sprouting capacity of nigral dopaminergic neurons late in Parkinson’s disease (12, 22) and offers the
hope that application of BDNF might constitute an
effective treatment for Parkinson’s disease.
To be able to play a role in the development of PD it
seems reasonable to expect that BDNF be synthesized
by human nigral dopaminergic neurons. The substantia nigra contains BDNF protein (29) and the nigral
dopaminergic neurons are BDNF immunoreactive (32)
but as BDNF is readily moved by anterograde transport (1) they are not necessarily its source. In this
study, in situ hybridization has demonstrated that
BDNF mRNA is expressed by dopaminergic neurons in

132

HOWELLS ET AL.

FIG. 6. Relationship between BDNF mRNA expression and cell
size. (A) Neuron cross-sectional area plotted against number of silver
grains/neuron. (B) Density of BDNF mRNA expression (silver grains/
␮m 2) plotted against cross-sectional area. Closed bars and data
points, PD; open bars and data points, controls. All values are
means ⫾ SEM, *P ⱕ 0.05, ***P ⱕ 0.0001, t test assuming equal
variance.

the human substantia nigra. Dry film autoradiograms
reveal that in the midbrain, the substantia nigra pars
compacta (Fig. lA) is a particularly rich source of
BDNF mRNA expression with more than three times
(P ⱕ 0.003) the level of background expression seen in
surrounding tissues such as the red nucleus (Figs. 1A
and 1C). Emulsion dipped autoradiography and microscopy revealed that all large neuromelanin-containing dopaminergic neurons express BDNF mRNA (Fig.
2). These findings are consistent with observations
that TH-immunopositive neurons in rat substantia
nigra express BDNF mRNA (8, 37) and confirm that, as

in other species, BDNF mRNA is expressed by dopaminergic neurons in the human SNpc.
BDNF mRNA expression was also detected over the
SNpc in patients with PD (Fig. lB). However, the level
of expression was less than one-third of that seen in the
controls (P ⱕ 0.001) (Fig. 1C). This was not a global
decline of mRNA expression in a group of ill patients
but specific to the substantia nigra since expression in
the red nucleus, used as an internal control, remained
unaltered (Figs. 1A and 1C). While this at first appears
to be entirely consistent simply with loss of the nigral
dopaminergic neurons which express the BDNF
mRNA, BDNF expression in the SNpc fell by approximately 70% (Figs. 1B and 1C) while the number of
pigmented neurons fell by only 40% (Fig. 3A). This led
us to look more closely at how much BDNF mRNA was
expressed by each surviving substantia nigra neuron.
Emulsion dipped autoradiography revealed that in
both the normal and the PD substantia nigra, BDNF
mRNA appears to be expressed at some level by all the
large neuromelanin-containing dopaminergic neurons.
There was no difference in the mean cross-sectional
neuronal areas sampled from each group of subjects;
thus the reduction in BDNF mRNA expression cannot
be attributed to a sampling error caused by reduced
neuron size in the PD group. Therefore, the reduction
of BDNF mRNA expression in PD occurs because of
both loss of BDNF mRNA-expressing neurons and reduced BDNF expression by a proportion of those that
survive.
The observation that all large neuromelanin-containing substantia nigra neurons express BDNF
mRNA is somewhat at odds with the immunohistochemical data which suggest that only 65% of melanized neurons are BDNF immunoreactive (32). One
explanation for this discrepancy might be that immunonegative neurons are those expressing lower levels
of BDNF mRNA. Alternatively, if the BDNF protein is
rapidly transported to dopaminergic terminals in the
caudate nucleus or putamen, immunoreactivity in the
cell body may be hard to detect even though BDNF
mRNA is present and protein synthesis is occurring.
On demelanized sections, 20% fewer silver grains (P ⱕ
0.02) were detected on average over the surviving neurons in the PD substantia nigra than in their control
counterparts (Fig. 3B). If lack of BDNF immunoreactivity in melanized neurons reflects lower levels of
BDNF mRNA expression, this would provide a ready
explanation for the apparent sensitivity of BDNF-immunoreactive melanized neurons to Parkinson’s disease (32) reflecting changes in detection limits rather
than sensitivity to injury. The intensity of BDNF-immunoreactive staining is not an all-or-nothing affair as
is illustrated by the observation that intracerebroventricular injections of colchicine to inhibit axonal transport of BDNF in rodents greatly elevates BDNF protein staining in nigral cell bodies (1).

REDUCED BDNF mRNA EXPRESSION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

While the mean reduction of BDNF mRNA expression per surviving neuron is relatively small (20%),
examination of the distribution of BDNF mRNA expression in every dopaminergic neuron sampled revealed the presence of a population of dopaminergic
neurons in the PD group with particularly low levels of
BDNF mRNA expression. Twenty-eight percent of PD
neurons but only 15% of the control neurons had BDNF
mRNA expression more than 1 SD below the mean of
the control group (42 grains/neuron). This difference in
proportions is highly significant (P ⱕ 0.000001,
Fig. 4).
Examining the proportion of neurons expressing increasing ranges of BDNF mRNA revealed a consistent
loss of neurons expressing moderate to high levels of
BDNF mRNA and confirmed the increase in the proportion of neurons expressing low (25– 49 silver grains/
neuron, P ⱕ 0.001) and very low (0 –24 silver grains/
neuron, P ⱕ 0.01) levels of BDNF mRNA (Fig. 5). The
observation that the number of neurons expressing the
lowest levels of BDNF mRNA in PD exceeds that in
controls suggests that this downward shift in the frequency distribution represents a decrease in BDNF
mRNA expression across the entire population of PD
dopaminergic neurons rather than a relative preservation of neurons less dependent on BDNF. This is consistent with the finding that the PD neurons expressing the lowest levels of BDNF mRNA are larger than
expected (P ⱕ 0.05, Fig. 6A). To ensure that these
observations were not biased by an unexpected sampling error, the silver grain counts per neuron were
corrected for sampling area to give a grain density per
square micrometer (Fig. 6B). This revealed a direct and
identical relationship between the density of BDNF
mRNA expression and neuron cross-sectional area
(r 2 ⫽ 0.93, P ⱕ 0.00001) for all of the control and the
majority of PD dopaminergic neurons (Fig. 6B). This is
consistent with the observation that application of
BDNF increases the soma area of cultured human fetal
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons (40) and provides evidence that the activity of adult human dopaminergic neurons is directly dependent on autocrine/
paracrine production of BDNF. Within the group of
neurons with the lowest total number of silver grains
per neuron (0 –24 silver grains/neuron), the density of
silver grains per square micrometer was 30% lower in
the PD group than in the controls (P ⬍ 0.001) confirming the presence of a subpopulation of neurons
abnormal in both BDNF mRNA expression and size. It
is interesting to note that the neurons expressing the
lowest levels of BDNF (below the lowest value seen in
the controls) comprises approximately 3% of the population of surviving pigmented neurons, a number very
close to estimated 5% of neurons lost annually in PD
(26). It is therefore conceivable that low levels of BDNF
expression in adult life could result in dopaminergic
neuronal death in PD. The finding that these neurons

133

are larger than expected for their level of BDNF mRNA
expression also suggests that loss of BDNF precedes
reduction in size.
It is also possible that depression of BDNF mRNA
expression might be an irrelevant consequence of neuronal injury rather than its cause. This is an important
issue which is particularly difficult to answer in a
study of the level of BDNF mRNA expression by a
small subset of individual cells. The traditional approach in most in situ hybridization studies would be to
“normalize” the quantitation of BDNF mRNA measurements in an area of interest by measuring the
expression of an additional “housekeeping gene” such
as ␤-actin or glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase on adjacent tissue sections. It is theoretically
possible to take much thinner sections that allow different probes to be used on adjacent sections but differences in the proportion of an individual cells volume
represented in both sections are likely to compound
rather than reduce experimental error. The alternative
of quantifying the expression of two labeled probes
within a single section (and thus in single cells), as
would be required for this study, is impractical as all
current detection systems would interfere with each
others’ quantitation. Moreover, the utility of housekeeping genes as internal controls is itself under question. For example, of six different GAPDH isoforms, all
are differentially regulated during neuronal apoptosis
(36) and a 75% increase of GAPDH mRNA expression
can be induced by hypoxia (45). Similar observations
also suggest that ␤-actin mRNA expression is itself
regulated by axonal regrowth (25) and that ␤-actin
may be enriched in structures having a high capacity of
remodeling in the rat cerebellum (28). The only conclusive way to answer this elusive “chicken-and-egg”
question of which comes first, loss of BDNF and then
cell injury and death or cell injury and then loss of
BDNF, would be to model a long-term deficit of BDNF
production in an adult animal (to mimic the time
course of development of Parkinson’s disease) and determine whether it leads to loss of substantia nigra
dopaminergic neurons and a syndrome akin to Parkinson’s disease.
Reduced BDNF expression might affect dopaminergic neuron viability by a number of mechanisms. If
BDNF is an autocrine/paracrine factor for dopaminergic neurons, loss of dopaminergic neurons due to disease progression with a concomitant local reduction in
BDNF production would be predicted to compromise
the well-being of their surviving neighbors making
them more susceptible to the insult which causes Parkinson’s disease. An extreme version of this mechanism would allow a relatively minor neuronal loss to
establish a wave of degeneration that spreads through
all of the BDNF-dependent nigral neurons. However,
as we do not see a secondary wave of degeneration
following partial 6-OHDA and MPTP lesions this op-

134

HOWELLS ET AL.

tion seems unlikely. Another possibility is that failing
to synthesize enough BDNF leads directly to the BDNF
mRNA-positive cells own demise. Infusing antisense
oligonucleotides directed against the BDNF mRNA sequence into mouse striatum greatly diminishes the
capacity for neurite outgrowth in the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system (unpublished observation) confirming that diminished BDNF expression can indeed have
a profound deleterious effect on the adult nigrostriatal
dopaminergic system.
In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that BDNF
mRNA is expressed in the human SNpc and that this
expression occurs specifically in dopaminergic neurons.
In clinically and neuropathologically typical idiopathic
Parkinson’s disease, BDNF expression in the SNpc is
reduced. This reduction is due, in part, to loss of SNpc
dopaminergic neurons which express BDNF. However,
surviving and apparently normal dopaminergic neurons in the PD SNpc express less BDNF than normal
with a subset of neurons expressing particularly low
levels of BDNF. These observations suggest the possibility that reduced BDNF expression might contribute
directly to loss of nigral dopaminergic neurons and the
genesis of Parkinson’s disease.

9.

10.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

16.

This work was supported by funding from The Austin Hospital
Medical Research Foundation, Parkinson’s Victoria, and the Bethlehem Griffiths Research Foundation.

17.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Altar, C. A., and P. S. DiStefano. 1998. Neurotrophin trafficking
by anterograde transport. Trends Neurosci. 2: 433– 437.
Appel, S. H. 1981. A unifying hypothesis for the cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, parkinsonism, and Alzheimer disease.
Ann. Neurol. 10: 499 –505.
Batchelor, P. E., G. T. Liberatore, J. Y. Wong, M. J. Porritt, F.
Frerichs, G. A. Donnan, and D. W. Howells. 1999. Activated
macrophages and microglia induce dopaminergic sprouting in
the injured striatum and express brain-derived neurotrophic
factor and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor. J. Neurosci. 19: 1708 –1716.
Benisty, S., F. Boissiere, B. Faucheux, Y. Agid, and E. C.
Hirsch. 1998. trkB messenger RNA expression in normal human brain and in the substantia nigra of parkinsonian patients:
An in situ hybridization study. Neuroscience 86: 813– 826.
Bernheimer, H., W. Birkmayer, O. Hornykiewicz, K. Jellinger,
and F. Seitelberger. 1973. Brain dopamine and the syndromes
of Parkinson and Huntington: Clinical, morphological and neurochemical correlations. J. Neurol. Sci. 20: 415– 455.
Bohn, M. C., L. Culpit, F. Marciano, and D. M. Gash. 1987.
Adrenal medulla grafts enhance recovery of striatal dopaminergic fibres. Science 237: 913–916.
Fiandaca, M. S., J. H. Kordower, J. T. Hansen, S. S. Jiao, and
D. M. Gash. 1988. Adrenal medullary autografts into the basal
ganglia of Cebus monkeys: Injury-induced regeneration. Exp.
Neurol. 102: 76 –91.
Gall, C. M., S. J. Gold, P. J. Isackson, and K. B. Seroogy. 1992.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3 mRNAs

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

are expressed in ventral midbrain regions containing dopaminergic neurons. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 3: 56 – 63.
Galpern, W. R., D. M. Frim, S. B. Tatter, C. A. Altar, M. F. Beal,
and O. Isacson. 1996. Cell-mediated delivery of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor enhances dopamine levels in an MPP⫹ rat
model of substantia nigra degeneration. Cell Transplant. 5:
225–232.
Gash, D. M., Z. Zhang, A. Ovadia, W. A. Cass, A. Yi, L. Simmerman, D. Russell, D. Martin, P. A. Lapchak, F. Collins, B. J.
Hoffer, and G. A. Gerhardt. 1996. Functional recovery in parkinsonian monkeys treated with GDNF. Nature 380: 252–255.
Gibb, W. R. 1989. Neuropathology in movement disorders.
J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychchiatry Suppl.: 55– 67.
Hirsch, E. C., C. Duyckaerts, F. Javoy-Agid, J. J. Hauw, and Y.
Agid. 1990. Does adrenal graft enhance recovery of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson’s disease? Ann. Neurol. 27: 676 – 682.
Hou, J. G., L. F. Lin, and C. Mytilineou. 1996. Glial cell linederived neurotrophic factor exerts neurotrophic effects on dopaminergic neurons in vitro and promotes their survival and
regrowth after damage by 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium.
J. Neurochem. 66: 74 – 82.
Howells, D. W., G. A. Donnan, J. Y. Wong, S. J. Kaczmarczyk,
P. J. Chilcho, G. C. Fabinyi, and F. A. Mendelsohn. 1993.
Surgical damage stimulates proliferation of dopamine uptake
sites in normal mouse brain. Brain Res. 622: 285–288.
Howells, D. W., G. T. Liberatore, J. Y. F. Wong, and G. A.
Donnan. 1996. Dopaminergic responses to striatal damage.
J. Neurol. Sci. 139: 125–130.
Howells, D. W., M. J. Porritt, P. E. Batchelor, R. Kalnins, A. J.
Hughes, J. Y. F. Wong, and G. A. Donnan. 1998. Does reduced
BDNF expression contribute to development of Parkinson’s disease? Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 24: Abstr. 479.9.
Hughes, A. J., Y. Ben-Shlomo. S. E. Daniel, and A. J. Lees.
1992. What features improve the accuracy of clinical diagnosis
in Parkinson’s disease: A clinicopathologic study. Neurology 42:
1142–1146.
Hunot, S., V. Bernard, B. Faucheux, F. Boissiere, E. Leguern,
C. Brana, P. P. Gautris, J. Guerin, B. Bloch, Y. Agid, and E. C.
Hirsch. 1996. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)
gene expression in the human brain: A post mortem in situ
hybridisation study with special reference to Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural Transm. 103: 1043–1052.
Hyman, C., M. Hofer, Y-A. Barde, M. Juhasz, G. D. Yancopoulos, S. Squinto, and R. M. Lindsay. 1991. BDNF is a neurotrophic factor for dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra.
Nature 350: 230 –232.
Jones, K. R., and L. F. Reichardt. 1990. Molecular cloning of a
human gene that is a member of the nerve growth factor family.
PNAS 87: 8060 – 8064.
Kingsbury, A. E., O. J. Foster, A. P. Nisbet, N. Cairns, L. Bray,
D. J. Eve, A. J. Lees, and C. D. Marsden. 1995. Tissue pH as an
indicator of mRNA preservation in human post-mortem brain.
Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 28: 311–318.
Kordower, J. H., E. Cochran, R. D. Penn, and C. G. Goetz. 1991.
Putative chromaffin cell survival and enhanced host-derived
TH-fiber innervation following a functional adrenal medulla
autograft for Parkinson’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 29: 405– 412.
Levivier, M., S. Przedborski, C. Bencsics, and U. J. Kang. 1995.
Intrastriatal implantation of fibroblasts genetically engineered
to produce brain-derived neurotrophic factor prevents degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in a rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. J. Neurosci. 15: 7810 –7820.
Liberatore, G. T., J. Y. Wong, M. J. Porritt, G. A. Donnan, and
D. W. Howells. 1997. Expression of glial cell line-derived neu-

REDUCED BDNF mRNA EXPRESSION IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

rotrophic factor (GDNF) mRNA following mechanical injury to
mouse striatum. NeuroReport 8: 3097–3101.
Lund, L. M., and I. G. McQuarrie. 1996. Axonal regrowth upregulates beta-actin and Jun D mRNA expression. J. Neurobiol.
31: 476 – 486.
McGeer, P. L., S. Itagaki, H. Akiyama, and E. G. McGeer. 1988.
Rate of cell death in parkinsonism indicates active neuropathological process. Ann. Neurol. 24: 574 –576.
Merlio, J. P., P. Ernfors, M. Jaber, and H. Persson. 1992.
Molecular cloning of rat trkC and distribution of cells expressing messenger RNAs for members of the trk family in the rat
central nervous system. Neuroscience 51: 513–532.
Micheva, K. D., A. Vallee, C. Beaulieu, I. M. Herman, and N.
Leclerc. 1998. beta-Actin is confined to structures having high
capacity of remodelling in developing and adult rat cerebellum.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 10: 3785–3798.
Mogi, M., A. Togari, T. Kondo, Y. Mizuno, O. Komure, S. Kuno,
H. Ichinose, and T. Nagatsu. 1999. Brain-derived growth factor
and nerve growth factor concentrations are decreased in the
substantia nigra in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci. Lett. 270:
45– 48.
Moller, J. C., J. Sautter, and A. Kupsch. 1996. Potential of
neurotrophic factors in therapy of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neural Transm. 48: 103–112.
Okazawa, H., M. Murata, M. Watanabe, M. Kamei, and I.
Kanazawa. 1992. Dopaminergic stimulation up-regulates the in
vivo expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in
the striatum. FEBS Lett. 313: 138 –142.
Parain, K., M. G. Murer, Q. Yan, B. Faucheux, Y. Agid, E.
Hirsch, and R. Raisman-Vozari. 1999. Reduced expression of
brain-derived neurotrophic factor protein in Parkinson’s disease substantia nigra. NeuroReport 25: 557–561.
Plunkett, R. J., K. S. Bankiewicz, A. C. Cummins, R. S. Miletich, S. Schwartz, and E. H. Oldfield. 1990. Long-term evaluation of hemiparkinsonian monkeys after adrenal autografting
or cavitation alone. J. Neurosurg. 73: 918 –926.
Przedborski, S., M. Levivier, V. Kostic, V. Jackson-Lewis, A.
Dollison, D. M. Gash, S. Fahn, and J. L. Cadet. 1991. Sham
transplantation protects against 6-hydroxydopamine-induced
dopaminergic toxicity in rats: Behavioral and morphological
evidence. Brain Res. 550: 231–238.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45.

135

Ringstedt, T., H. Lagercrantz, and H. Persson. 1993. Expression of members of the trk family in the developing postnatal
rat brain. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 72: 119 –131.
Saunders, P. A., R. W. Chen, and D. M. Chuang. 1999. Nuclear
translocation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
isoforms during neuronal apoptosis. J. Neurochem. 72: 925–
932.
Seroogy, K. B., K. H. Lundgren, T. M. Tran, K. M. Guthrie, P. J.
Isackson, and C. M. Gall. 1994. Dopaminergic neurons in rat
ventral midbrain express brain-derived neurotrophic factor and
neurotrophin-3 mRNAs. J. Comp. Neurol. 342: 321–334.
Shults, C. W., T. Kimber, and C. A. Altar. 1995. BDNF attenuates the effects of intrastriatal injection of 6-hydroxydopamine. NeuroReport 6: 1109 –1112.
Spina, M. B., S. P. Squinto, J. Miller, R. M. Lindsay, and C.
Hyman. 1992. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor protects dopamine neurons against 6-hydroxydopamine and N-methyl-4phenylpyridinium ion toxicity: Involvement of the glutathione
system. J. Neurochem. 59: 99 –106.
Studer, L., C. Spenger, R. W. Seiler, A. Othberg, O. Lindvall,
and P. Odin. 1996. Effects of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
on neuronal structure of dopaminergic neurons in dissociated
cultures of human fetal mesencephalon. Exp. Brain Res. 108:
328 –336.
Tsukahara, T., M. Takeda, S. Shimohama, O. Ohara, and N.
Hashimoto. 1995. Effects of brain-derived neurotrophic factor
on 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced parkinsonism in monkeys. Neurosurgery 37: 733–739.
Ward, C. D., and W. R. Gibb. 1990. Research diagnostic criteria
for Parkinson’s disease. Adv. Neurol. 53: 245–249.
Wong, J. Y., G. T. Liberatore, G. A. Donnan, and D. W. Howells.
1997. Expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and TrkB
neurotrophin receptors after striatal injury in the mouse. Exp.
Neurol. 148: 83–91.
Yurek, D. M., W. Lu, S. Hipkens, and S. J. Wiegand. 1996.
BDNF enhances the functional reinnervation of the striatum by
grafted fetal dopamine neurons. Exp. Neurol. 137: 105–118.
Zhong, H., and J. W. Simons. 1999. Direct comparison of
GAPDH, beta-actin, cyclophilin, and 28S rRNA as internal
standards for quantifying RNA levels under hypoxia. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 259: 523–526.

