Transcription factor Nurr1 maintains ﬁber integrity
and nuclear-encoded mitochondrial gene expression
in dopamine neurons
Banafsheh Kadkhodaeia, Alexandra Alvarssonb,1, Nicoletta Schintub,1, Daniel Ramskölda, Nikolaos Volakakisa,
Eliza Joodmardia, Takashi Yoshitakec, Jan Kehrc, Mickael Decressacd, Anders Björklundd,2, Rickard Sandberga,e,
Per Svenningssonb, and Thomas Perlmanna,e,2
a
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Stockholm Branch, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden; bDepartment of Clinical Neuroscience, Center for Molecular
Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17176 Stockholm, Sweden; cDepartment of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm,
Sweden; dWallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Lund University, SE-22184 Lund, Sweden; and eDepartment of Cell
and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden

Contributed by Anders Björklund, December 13, 2012 (sent for review October 18, 2012)

Developmental transcription factors important in early neuron
speciﬁcation and differentiation often remain expressed in the adult
brain. However, how these transcription factors function to mantain
appropriate neuronal identities in adult neurons and how transcription factor dysregulation may contribute to disease remain largely
unknown. The transcription factor Nurr1 has been associated with
Parkinson’s disease and is essential for the development of ventral
midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons. We used conditional Nurr1 genetargeted mice in which Nurr1 is ablated selectively in mature DA
neurons by treatment with tamoxifen. We show that Nurr1 ablation
results in a progressive pathology associated with reduced striatal
DA, impaired motor behaviors, and dystrophic axons and dendrites.
We used laser-microdissected DA neurons for RNA extraction and
next-generation mRNA sequencing to identify Nurr1-regulated
genes. This analysis revealed that Nurr1 functions mainly in transcriptional activation to regulate a battery of genes expressed in DA
neurons. Importantly, nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes were
identiﬁed as the major functional category of Nurr1-regulated target genes. These studies indicate that Nurr1 has a key function in
sustaining high respiratory function in these cells, and that Nurr1
ablation in mice recapitulates early features of Parkinson’s disease.

|

|

NR4A2 nuclear receptor laser capture microdissection
RNA sequencing orphan receptor

|

|

U

nder experimental conditions, somatic differentiated cells
can undergo reprogramming into other cell types or induced
pluripotent stem cells (1). This remarkable plasticity raises questions of how the differentiated cellular identity is maintained for
extended periods in normal life (2). Of particular relevance is how
neurons, which should retain their speciﬁc functions for decades in
a human brain, stably maintain their unique differentiated properties, and how disrupted maintenance of the correct differentiated
identity may be related to disease. Under embryonic development,
signaling events induce the expression of transcription factors that
combinatorially function to specify appropriate identities and differentiation of speciﬁc neuron types. Many of these transcription
factors continue to be expressed in adult neurons as well; however,
little is known of their functions in the adult brain, or the extent to
which they contribute to the stability of the differentiated state (3).
Degeneration of ventral midbrain (VMB) dopamine (DA)
neurons, particularly neurons of the substantia nigra compacta
(SNc), causes many of the characteristic symptoms in patients with
Parkinson’s disease (PD). PD is characterized by a progressive
pathology involving the appearance of insoluble protein inclusions
known as Lewy bodies and eventually the death of neurons. Several
studies have indicated that loss of striatal DA and other dopaminergic properties cause symptoms in PD long before cell bodies
within the SNc actually die (4). Thus, PD cell pathology may inﬂuence differentiated neuronal properties, and from this perspective, it is of interest to explore how developmental transcription
factors contribute to DA neuron function in the adult brain.

2360–2365 | PNAS | February 5, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 6

The transcription factor Nurr1 is one of a family of nuclear
receptors critical for DA neuron development. Structural studies
have found that this protein is distinct from many other ligandbinding nuclear receptors, lacking a ligand-binding cavity, and
thus may function as a ligand-independent transcription factor
(5). During the development of DA neurons, Nurr1 expression is
induced in early postmitotic neurons and is then maintained
under differentiation and in the adult brain (6). In Nurr1 null
gene-targeted mice, DA neurons fail to differentiate, and DA
neuron markers are absent at birth (7–9). Several recent studies
have suggested that disrupted Nurr1 function in adult DA neurons may contribute to the cellular pathology in PD; Nurr1 gene
polymorphisms have been associated with PD, and Nurr1 heterozygous mutant mice show increased vulnerability to DA
neuron toxic insults (10–13). Moreover, Nurr1 is down-regulated
in peripheral lymphocytes of PD patients, and postmortem
studies have found that in PD, Nurr1 is down-regulated in the
remaining DA neurons showing signs of neuropathology (14, 15).
Because Nurr1 null mice die soon after birth owing to deﬁciencies in nondopaminergic cells, these animals cannot be used
to demonstrate how Nurr1 functions in maintaining mature DA
neuron identity in the adult brain. Moreover, DA neurons in
heterozygous Nurr1 null mice have developed with subthreshhold levels of Nurr1 and thus may have defects acquired under
development and neuronal maturation. Previous studies of mice
with heterozygous null mutations in other transcription factor
genes have also elucidated deﬁciencies in adult DA neurons, but
whether or not these observations reﬂect developmental or adult
functions remains unclear (16, 17). For these reasons, in previous
work, we used mice with a ﬂoxed Nurr1 allele, allowing conditional Nurr1 gene targeting in adult brains through stereotaxic
injection of adeno-associated virus vectors harboring a Creencoding gene (18). The results indicated an association between
Nurr1 ablation in mature DA neurons decreased levels of some,
but not all, dopaminergic markers. However, for technical reasons that strategy yielded a relatively high degree of variability
and did not provide a comprehensive view of the gene expression
programs regulated by Nurr1 in adult DA neurons. Moreover,
because not all DA neurons were targeted by Cre expression, it

Author contributions: B.K., A.A., N.S., A.B., P.S., and T.P. designed research; B.K., A.A.,
N.S., D.R., N.V., E.J., T.Y., J.K., and M.D. performed research; D.R. and R.S. contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; B.K., A.A., N.S., D.R., N.V., E.J., T.Y., J.K., M.D., A.B., R.S., P.S., and
T.P. analyzed data; and B.K., N.V., A.B., and T.P. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data deposition: The data reported in this paper have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no. GSE42912).
1

A.A. and N.S. contributed equally to this work.

2

To whom correspondence may be addressed. E-mail: anders.bjorklund@med.lu.se or
thomas.perlmann@licr.ki.se.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1221077110/-/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1221077110

was difﬁcult to assess whether Nurr1 ablation resulted in a DA
neuron pathology related to PD.
In the present study, Nurr1 was conditionally ablated by tamoxifen treatment of conditional Nurr1 gene-targeted mice expressing
the CreERT2 enzyme under the dopamine transporter (DAT) gene
regulatory sequences (19). Thus, complete Nurr1 ablation in all DA
neurons was achieved in a tamoxifen-controlled manner. This
allowed more extensive histological and behavioral analyses and,
importantly, the use of laser capture microdissection (LCM) followed by next-generation mRNA sequencing to provide unbiased
analyses of differential gene expression resulting from Nurr1 ablation in adult DA neurons. Taken together, our data show that
Nurr1 regulates key genes, including a battery of nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial genes, and that adult Nurr1 ablation recapitulates
early pathological features of PD.
Results
Reduced Levels of Striatal DA and Impaired Behavior in Nurr1-Ablated
Mice. For Nurr1 ablation in mature DA neurons, we used Nurr1

Kadkhodaei et al.

Fig. 1. Nurr1 ablation in developing and adult DA neurons. (A–D) Crosssections at the level of VMB showing the VTA and SNc and at the level of
striatum showing the CPu and NAc. (E–P) Immunostaining of TH (green) and
Nurr1 (red) at the level of the VMB and in the striatum of cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl),
cNurr1DatCre (DatCre), and cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER) mice. Nurr1 was ablated
by DAT-Cre crosses (cNurr1DatCre mice) at approximately E13.5 and analyzed at
P0 (E–H), or treated with tamoxifen at P0 (I–L) or at 5 wk after birth (M–P). In
I–P, mice were killed at 1 wk after tamoxifen treatment. Nurr1 immunoreactivity was almost completely lost in TH-positive cells in the cNurr1DatCre and
cNurr1DatCreER mice (compare the high-magniﬁcation insets in I, J, M, and N).

Levels of DA and DA metabolites were measured in the striatum by HPLC of dissected tissue extracts from cNurr1DatCreER at
11 mo after tamoxifen treatment. DA was dramatically reduced
in both the caudate putamen (CPu) and the nucleus accumbens
(NAc) (Fig. 3A). Of note, DA levels were reduced more significantly within the striatum than within the SNc and VTA (Fig.
3A). Consistent with these ﬁndings, motor behaviors were
affected in cNurr1DatCreER mice. Open-ﬁeld locomotion tests
performed at 3–5 mo and 11 mo after tamoxifen treatment
demonstrated signiﬁcant reductions in both horizontal and vertical (i.e., number of rearings) locomotor activity in mutant mice
(Fig. 3B). Moreover, the vertical pole test indicated prolonged
turning time and total task time in cNurr1DatCreER mice (Fig. 3C).
Taken together, our ﬁndings indicate that ablation of Nurr1 in
mature DA neurons results in a severe decrease in DA neuron
markers, reduced striatal DA, and signiﬁcant motor impairment.
Fiber Pathology in Nurr1-Ablated Mice. Although no major loss of
cell bodies was apparent after Nurr1 ablation (Fig. 2P and Fig. S2
I–L), progressive DA neuron ﬁber pathology became evident in
these animals. TH-positive dendrites extending into the substantia nigra pars reticulata appeared normal in terms of ﬁber
density (but not in TH intensity, as reported earlier) at 4 wk after
Nurr1 ablation, but progressively reduced ﬁber density was seen
at 4 mo and 11 mo, and examination at high magniﬁcation
revealed clear signs of ﬁber pathology, characterized by fragmented dendrites frequently interrupted by varicosities (Fig. 4
A–D). Similar abnormalities in ﬁbers extending rostrally toward
the striatum were also apparent in cNurr1DatCreER mice at 11 mo
after tamoxifen treatment (Fig. 4 E–H).
PNAS | February 5, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 6 | 2361

NEUROSCIENCE

ﬂoxed mice and a mouse strain harboring a tamoxifen-inducible
Cre (CreERT2) linked to the DAT gene regulatory sequences in
a bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC-DAT-CreERT2 mice) (18,
19). We generated homozygous Nurr1 ﬂoxed mice harboring
either no copies (cNurr1Ctrl) or a single copy of the BAC-DATCreERT2 transgene (cNurr1DatCreER). As described previously,
Cre-mediated ablation results in removal of the ﬁrst coding exon
of Nurr1. All animals used for conditional ablation were treated
with tamoxifen at the indicated time points.
We ﬁrst analyzed the consequences of Nurr1 ablation at different developmental stages. Nurr1 was ablated in developing
DA neurons at embryonic day (E) 13.5, by crossing with mice
harboring Cre targeted to the DAT locus (DAT-Cre) (18), or by
tamoxifen treatment of cNurr1DatCreER mice at birth (P0) or at
age 5 wk. Tissue was collected at 1 wk after Nurr1 ablation and
used for combined tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and Nurr1
immunostaining (Fig. 1). Ablation during embryogenesis resulted in a nearly complete loss of TH within the striatum and DA
neuron cell bodies within the SNc (Fig. 1 E–H). Ablation at birth
also resulted in a drastic loss of TH (Fig. 1 I–L) within both the
midbrain and the striatum, whereas ablation at age 5 wk resulted
in a more modest reduction of TH immunostaining and no apparent loss of cell bodies (Fig. 1 M–P). As expected, nuclear Nurr1
immunostaining was not detected in the VMB from Nurr1-ablated
mice (Fig. 1 F, J, and N). A more comprehensive analysis of
markers in animals treated with tamoxifen at P0 demonstrated
drastic down-regulation of DAT and vesicular monoamine
transporter 2 (VMAT2) as well, whereas aromatic amino acid
decarbocylase (AADC) and Pitx3 were less affected (Fig. S1).
These results demonstrate that DA neurons become progressively
more resistant to Nurr1 ablation with increasing age.
We wished to analyze the consequences of Nurr1 ablation in
mature DA neurons in more depth. In all of the following experiments cNurr1DatCreER mice were treated with tamoxifen at 5 wk
after birth and analyzed at the indicated time points. At the level of
the VMB, a marked reduction of TH and VMAT2 immunoreactivity was noted at 1 wk after tamoxifen treatment in cNurr1DatCreER
and was further exaggerated at 4 wk (Fig. 2 A–F). In contrast,
DAT, AADC, and Pitx3 were decreased only modestly (Fig. 2 G–
O) at both time points anayzed. At the level of the striatum, TH,
VMAT2, and DAT were decreased at 1 wk and 4 wk after Nurr1
ablation (Fig. 2 A′–I′). Moreover, the number of TH-positive cell
bodies was not decreased signiﬁcantly at 2 mo after tamoxifen
treatment in Nurr1-ablated VMB, as determined by stereology
(Fig. 2P).
Similar severe decreases in TH and DAT expression were also
apparent within the VMB at 4 mo and 11 mo after tamoxifen
treatment (Fig. S2). Of note, at these advanced stages, AADC
also remained robustly expressed within DA neuron cell bodies.
Thus, Nurr1 ablation in mature DA neurons is associated with
decreased expression of TH, VMAT2, and DAT; however, the
overall cellular integrity of DA neuron cell bodies within the
VMB remains intact in Nurr1-ablated mice.

4 wks post-Tam
Ctrl

Tamoxifen at 5 wks
1 wk post-Tam
4 wks post-Tam

4 wks

1 wk

DATCreER

Ctrl

DATCreER

DATCreER

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

DAT

VMAT

TH

A

4 wks

P

C trl

D A T C reE R

no of TH+ neurons

AADC

12000
10000

N

O

Pitx3

M

8000
6000
4000
2000
0

An overall decreased density of DAT-positive ﬁbers was also
seen in the striatum and globus pallidus (GP) of these animals at
4 mo after tamoxifen treatment (Fig. 4 I–T; compare O, P, and Q
with R, S, and T). Axon bundles within the medial forebrain
bundle appeared normal at 1 mo after tamoxifen treatment but
were signiﬁcantly decreased at 4 mo after tamoxifen treatment
(Fig. S3 I–L). Moreover, at 11 months after tamoxifen treatment,
TH-positive axons within the GP appeared fragmented and also
contained frequent varicosities in cNurr1DatCreER mice, but not in
cNurr1Ctrl mice (Fig. 4 U–Z). DAT-positive axons within the
medial forebrain bundle appeared normal at 1 mo after Nurr1
ablation, but were detected at decreased density at 4 mo after
Nurr1 ablation (Fig. S3 M–T).
Proﬁling Nurr1-Regulated Gene Expression by RNA Sequencing. The
possibility of targeting Nurr1 in mature DA neurons prompted us
to analyze global gene expression changes occurring as a consequence of Nurr1 ablation. LCM was used to isolate SNc and
VTA TH-stained neurons from adult mice (Fig. S4), with 200
microdissected cells pooled from each animal and used for RNA
isolation and synthesis of a cDNA library suitable for mRNA
sequencing. We used a recently developed method for nextgeneration mRNA sequencing (Smart-Seq), designed for mRNA
transcriptomics using low amounts of total RNA down to what
can be isolated even from single cells (20).
We used the Smart-Seq protocol to analyze mRNA gene expression in DA neurons from cNurr1ctrl (n = 6) and cNurr1DatCreER
(n = 9) mice. To avoid detection of gene expression changes
resulting from a Nurr1 ablation-induced progressive pathology
over an extended period, LCM was performed early, at 1 wk after
the completion of tamoxifen treatment. The Spearman correlation coefﬁcient between biological replicates averaged 0.86 and
was not below 0.81 for any sample, demonstrating high reproducibility between biological replicates. DEseq statistical analysis
based on a negative binomial distribution (21) detected 168 differentially expressed genes in samples from cNurr1DatCreER and
cNurr1ctrl DA neurons (Table S1). Several important observations
were derived from this analysis. First, a vast majority (94%; P <
1 × 10−11, binomial test) of the 168 differentially expressed genes
2362 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1221077110

SNc

VTA

Fig. 2. Expression analysis of DA neuron markers
and cell counting in Nurr1-ablated mice. Nurr1 was
ablated at age 5 wk by tamoxifen treatment.
Analyses were performed in cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and
cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER) mice at either 1 wk or 4
wk after tamoxifen treatment. (A–O) Marker expression at the level of the VMB. (A′–I′) Marker
expression at the level of the striatum. (P) Stereology of TH-positive neurons in the SNc and VTA in
cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER) mice
at 2 mo after tamoxifen treatment.

were expressed at a lower level in cNurr1DatCreER DA neurons,
indicating that Nurr1 functions primarily as an activator of gene
expression (Fig. 5A). Moreover, of the genes encoding proteins
involved in regulating the DA neurotransmitter phenotype, only
TH (4.2-fold) and VMAT2 (1.9-fold) were differentially expressed
at this early time point (Table S1). In contrast, and consistent with
immunostaining and in situ hybridization analysis, AADC and
DAT were not differentially expressed at 1 wk after Nurr1 ablation
(Fig. 2 J–O).
We also found that other transcription factors previously identiﬁed as essential for the generation of DA neurons, including
Pitx3, Lmx1a, Lmx1b, Otx2, and Engrailed1/2, were not differentially expressed in cNurr1DatCreER DA neurons. In Nurr1-ablated
cells, an aberrant truncated transcript remained expressed, because the promoter and regulatory sequences of Nurr1 remained
intact. The expected loss of excised coding sequences was conﬁrmed by the absence of reads in deleted sequences in cells from
cNurr1DatCreER neurons, but not from cNurr1Ctrl neurons. Interestingly, the aberrant Nurr1 mRNA transcribed from the Credeleted nr4a2 gene locus (Table S1) was up-regulated (by 3.0-fold).
Although this ﬁnding suggests that Nurr1 may function in autoregulatory negative feedback, we cannot exclude the possibility that
the abnormal ﬂoxed Nurr1 mRNA may be more stable and thus
result in apparent up-regulation in Nurr1-ablated neurons.
Gene Ontology and pathway enrichment analyses were performed using ToppGene (22) to identify functional categories of
differentially expressed genes. This analysis showed that nuclearencoded mitochondrial genes were strikingly overrepresented
among the gene sets expressed at signiﬁcantly lower levels in
Nurr1-ablated DA neurons (P < 0.01). Most of these genes encode proteins with functions in either oxidative phosphorylation
or mitochondrial ribosomes (Fig. 5B). We decided to look at
different functional categories of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
genes in an attempt to identify regulatory trends extending beyond the genes identiﬁed as statistically signiﬁcantly regulated by
DeSeq analysis. Indeed, a highly signiﬁcant proportion (90%;
P < 1.3 × 10−15, binomial test) of all nuclear genes encoding
respiratory chain proteins (n = 90), including those that are
signiﬁcantly deregulated as determined by DeSeq, show lower
Kadkhodaei et al.

**

***

DA

DOPAC

**

2000
1000

**

0

Time (s)

30

Ctrl
DATCreER

*

20
10
0

4-7 mo

C

HVA

40

No of rearings

Distance (cm)

B 3000

***

**

11 mo

*

*

t-turn

t-total

120

4-7 mo

11 mo

t-turn

t-total

100
80
60
40
20
0

4-7 mo

11 mo

Kadkhodaei et al.

1 mo

DATCreER

Ctrl

4 mo

DATCreER

reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM) values in
Nurr1-ablated DA neurons compared with controls (Fig. 5C). In
contrast, only 58% of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes (n =
24; P = 0.54, binomial test) involved in fatty acid metabolism
showed lower RPKM values in Nurr1-ablated DA neurons (Fig.
5D). Additional categories also did not appear to be lower in
Nurr1-ablated cells, including those involved in apoptosis (57%;
n = 6) and glyconeogenesis (44%; n = 9).
To conﬁrm the dysregulated expression of mitochondrial genes,
we performed quantitative PCR analysis of independent mRNA
extracted from the VMB of adult control and cNurr1DatCreER mice.
Sod1, TSFM, Cox5b, Mrp63, and Cox6a1 were expressed at signiﬁcantly lower levels in cNurr1DatCreER mice, and nonsigniﬁcant
trends toward lower expression was seen for Nduf8, Cox5a, and
Cox8a. Of note, dissection of VMB tissue is also expected to include a substantial number of non-DA neurons, suggesting that
the actual level of dysregulation is underestimated by quantitative
PCR analysis. In addition, the pan-neuronal marker NeuN and
genes not identiﬁed as dysregulated by RNAseq (Pitx3 and Gfra1)
did not differ from controls in samples obtained from dissected
VMB (Fig. 5E). Taken together, our ﬁndings indicate that Nurr1
selectively contributes to the maintenance of normal expression
levels of nuclear-encoded genes involved in oxidative respiration,
but not of any other functional categories of nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial genes.

A

B

E

F

C

D

G

H

Str
Ctrl

Fig. 3. Analysis of catecholamines and motor behavior in Nurr1-ablated
mice. (A) Striatal levels of DA, 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), and
homovanillic acid (HVA) in cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER)
mice at 11 mo after tamoxifen treatment in 5-wk-old mice. Separate analyses were performed on tissue extracts from the VTA, SNc, NAc, and CPu, as
indicated. (B and C) Open-ﬁeld measures of horizontal (distance in cm over
a 5-min measurement) and vertical (number of rearings during a 5-min
measurement) locomotion (B) and vertical pole test of posture control (C) of
cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER) mice at 4–7 mo and 11 mo
after tamoxifen treatment in 5-wk-old mice. Here t-turn is the time required
to orient downward, and t-total is the total time taken to turn and descend
the pole. Note that overall performance was also poor in controls at 11 mo.

I

CPu

GP

J

K

M

N

P

Q

Str

U

CPu

CPu

L

CPu

GP

V

W

Y

Z

GP

CPu

O
CPu

R
CPu

S

T

X
CPu

GP

Fig. 4. Fiber integrity in Nurr1-ablated mice. (A–D) TH immunostaining by
horseradish peroxidase/diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining in either low magniﬁcation (4×; A and C) or high magniﬁcation (40×; B and D) showing dendrites extending into the substantia nigra reticulata in cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and
cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER) mice at 12 mo after tamoxifen treatment in 5-wkold mice. Boxed regions in A and C are shown in B and D. (E–H) TH immunoﬂuorescence in either low magniﬁcation (20×) or high magniﬁcation (35×)
showing ﬁbers extending dorsorostrally from the substantia nigra cell bodies
in the VMB. Arrowheads in H indicate abnormal ﬁbers. (I–T) DAT immunostaining (DAB) of the striatum in cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER)
mice at 1 mo and 4 mo after tamoxifen treatment in 5-wk-old mice. Images of
the striatum (Str) in I, L, O, and R are at low magniﬁcation (2×). Images at high
magniﬁcation (100×) (J, K, M, N, P, Q, S, and T) show ﬁbers in either the CPu or
in the GP, as indicated. (U–Z) TH immunoﬂuorescence of the striatum in
cNurr1Ctrl (Ctrl) and cNurr1DatCreER (DatCreER) mice at 11 mo after tamoxifen
treatment in 5-wk-old mice. Images at low magniﬁcation (U and X) and high
magniﬁcation (V–Z) show the Str, CPu, or GP, as indicated.

PNAS | February 5, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 6 | 2363

NEUROSCIENCE

**
**

Ctrl

*

Discussion
Under certain experimental conditions, particularly after forced
expression of developmental transcription factors, somatic differentiated cells can be reprogrammed into pluripotency or
transdifferentiate into other cell types. How differentiated cells
stably maintain their identities under normal conditions remains
largely unclear, however. It seems likely that transcription factors
that are important for establishing the differentiated neuronal
identity are also involved in its maintenance. We addressed this
question by analyzing how the DA neuron transcription factor
Nurr1 contributes to the maintenance of DA neurons. It seems
intuitive that maintenance of identity is critical for the function
of healthy neurons that should persist for many decades in the
human brain, and we have been particularly interested in examining whether pathological abnormalities in PD may be related to a failure of cells to sustain transcription factor function
in mature DA neurons. The results reported here indeed support
that adult Nurr1 ablation recapitulates features of PD.
Our ﬁndings showing that the loss of striatal DA and other
phenotypic changes occur long before neurons actually die are
consistent with the idea that dysfunctional transcription factor
function may contribute to PD (4). Several developmental
transcription factors, including Nurr1, Lmx1a/b, Engrailed 1, and
Pitx3, remain expressed in mature DA neurons, and nucleotide
polymorphisms in human genes encoding these factors have been
associated with PD (11–13, 23–26). Moreover, analysis of postmortem brain tissue has demonstrated down-regulation of Nurr1
and other key transcription factors in remaining DA neurons in
PD, and signiﬁcantly reduced Nurr1 and Pitx3 mRNA expression
levels in peripheral blood cells in PD patients (14, 15). Thus, it
seems likely that PD-associated pathological changes will inﬂuence transcription factor expression and consequently result in

11 mo
DATCreER

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

NAc
CPu

Ctrl

VTA
SN

11 mo
DATCreER

percent of Ctrl (%)

A

A

B

DATCreER (RPKM)

CHCHd2 Ndu2
Ndu8 Cox5a
Cox8a Cox5b
Cox6a1
OXPHOS

Sod1
ROS detox
D10Jhu81e
Unknown
1

1

7
7

Lars2
Tsfm Mrpl54
Rpl13 Mrps12
Mrp63 Mrps34

Ctrl (RPKM)

D
DATCreER (RPKM)

DATCreER (RPKM)

C

Ctrl (RPKM)

Ctrl (RPKM)

E 1.2
Fold change
compared to Nurr1 WT

1.0
0.8

*

*
*

0.6

*

*

0.2
0.4

N

e
u
Pi N
G tx 3
FR
α
SO 1
D1
TS
C FM
O
X
M 5β
R
P
C
O 63
X6
N α1
D
U
C F8
O
X
C 5α
O
X8
α

0

Fig. 5. RNA sequencing of control and Nurr1-ablated DA neurons. (A) Scatter
diagram showing all detected genes. Differentially expressed genes are
highlighted by red dots. The x-axis shows mRNA sequencing RPKM values from
control cells; the y-axis, mRNA sequencing RPKM values from Nurr1-ablated
cells. (B) Circle diagram showing functional categories and gene names of
signiﬁcantly regulated nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes. The majority of
these genes encode either proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation or
mitochondrial translation. One gene (Sod1) is implicated in radical oxygen
species (ROS) detoxiﬁcation. (C) Scatter diagram highlighting genes encoding
proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation. The x-axis shows mRNA sequencing RPKM values from control cells; the y-axis, mRNA sequencing RPKM
values from Nurr1-ablated cells. (D) Scatter diagram highlighting genes
encoding proteins involved in fatty acid metabolism. The x-axis shows mRNA
sequencing RPKM values from control cells; the y-axis, mRNA sequencing
RPKM values from Nurr1-ablated cells. (E) qPCR analysis in Nurr1 ablated
and control mice 8–10 wk after tamoxifen treatment. Data are expressed as
mean ± SEM (n = 5 per group). *P < 0.05 compared with Nurr1WT/WT group.

down-regulation of DA neuron-speciﬁc genes and accelerated
pathology. It is also interesting to note that α-synuclein, the main
protein constituent in Lewy bodies, is expressed in both the cytoplasm and in the nucleus, where it may exert at least some of
its toxicity in PD by interfering with transcription (27–29).
If abnormal transcription factor function is indeed contributing
to PD, then genetic disruption of transcription factors in adult
neurons in mice should recapitulate aspects of the degenerative
disease process. Conditional gene targeting of transcription factor
genes in mature DA neurons provides a rational strategy for
testing this hypothesis. Indeed, the phenotype of adult Nurr1ablated mice reported here resembles early features of PD, apparently supporting the possibility that diminished Nurr1 activity
may contribute to the disease. Accordingly, in both PD and the
gene-targeted mice studied here, striatal DA loss is accompanied
by motor deﬁciencies that become apparent before DA neurons
actually die. Reduced expression of VMAT2, as seen in Nurr1ablated mice, has been noted in PD as well (30). Nurr1 ablation
also results in a distinct ﬁber pathology that affects both dendrites
and axons, which is interesting in light of PD studies identifying
axon degeneration as an early event in disease progression (4). It
2364 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1221077110

should be noted that defects were always uniform on both sides of
the VMB and striatum. Thus, taken together, our observations
identify abnormalities that resemble signiﬁcant aspects of presymptomatic and early stages of PD, and suggest that Nurr1
conditional KO mice can serve as a relevant PD model.
Central to understanding how transcription factors may contribute to the function and disease in DA neurons is the identiﬁcation of regulated target genes. Examining the transcriptome
in speciﬁc populations of adult neurons presents a formidable
challenge, given that speciﬁc neuron types are intermingled with
other cell types and thus are difﬁcult to isolate. Using LCM for
isolation of speciﬁc neuron populations provides a powerful
strategy; however, low RNA yields is a common obstacle that
makes comprehensive analysis of differential gene expression
pattern technically challenging. The Smart-Seq method used in
the present study was developed for mRNA sequencing of very
small amounts of RNA, down to what can be extracted even
from single cells (20), and thus has potential for isolating RNA
from limited populations of brain cells isolated by LCM. Our
data indicate that comprehensive transcriptome data can be
derived from relatively small populations of neurons; we found
that the amount of RNA extracted from 200 laser-microdissected
DA neurons per analyzed animal was more than sufﬁcient for
comprehensive Smart-Seq analysis.
Cells were captured already at 1 wk after tamoxifen treatment
with the aim of primarily identifying direct regulatory targets of
Nurr1. It is impossible to exclude the possibility that some of the
differentially expressed genes are indirectly regulated via other
transcription factors; however, it is notable that none of the other
known DA neuron developmental transcription factors, including
Pitx3, Engrailed 1/2, FoxA2, and Otx2, were differentially expressed
in Nurr1-ablated neurons. The ﬁnding that Nurr1 seems to function in transcriptional activation in DA neurons (>90% of differentially expressed genes were higher in controls) is also
consistent with previous in vitro data showing that Nurr1 functions
as a potent activator of transcription (6). Although regulation of
DAT and Ret by Nurr1 has been suggested, these genes were not
signiﬁcantly dysregulated, as determined by RNAseq analysis.
Through in situ hybridization of RNA expression, our analysis
conﬁrmed that these two genes indeed are not down-regulated or
are only modestly down-regulated at 1 wk after ablation. However,
Nurr1 ablation is likely to result in pathology that leads to indirect
down-regulation of numerous additional genes at later time points.
Analysis of differential gene expression has provided a unique
ﬁngerprint of early gene expression changes occurring as a result
of Nurr1 ablation in mature DA neurons. A remarkable outcome
of this analysis is the ﬁnding that Nurr1 regulates a large number of
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes. Of interest, genes encoding
components of the respiratory chain seem to be particularly affected.
Seven genes encoding respiratory chain subunits were signiﬁcantly
dysregulated, but analysis of the entire battery of genes involved in
oxidative phosphorylation revealed that >90% of those genes had
lower RPKM values in Nurr1-ablated DA neurons compared with
controls (Fig. 5). Midbrain DA neurons are autonomous pacemakers and constantly ﬁre with moderate (i.e., tonic ﬁring) or very
high (i.e., burst ﬁring) frequencies to control a sustained and
adaptive release of DA in innervated target areas (31). This unique
behavior of DA neurons is highly energy-demanding and linked to
a high requirement for ATP-generating oxidative phosphorylation.
Of note, the SNc and VTA contain signiﬁcantly higher levels of
mitochondrial DNA compared with other brain regions, reﬂecting
the need for efﬁcient oxidative phosphorylation in these cells (32).
Our ﬁndings suggest that Nurr1 is an important transcription factors
for sustaining this distinguishing trait of DA neurons by positively
regulating a large number nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes.
How Nurr1 regulates these genes is an interesting avenue of study.
It seems likely that Nurr1 functionally interacts with other factors,
such as PGC-1α or nuclear respiratory factors, to regulate the battery of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes.
Numerous studies have implicated mitochondrial failure in the
pathogenesis of PD, and it seems plausible that insufﬁcient ATP
production as a result of Nurr1 down-regulation can contribute
to pathology, including the appearance of dystrophic axons and
Kadkhodaei et al.

Materials and Methods
Animals. Generation of conditional Nurr1 gene-targeted mice and mice
expressing the CreERT2 enzyme under the DAT gene regulatory sequences in
a bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC-DAT-CreERT2 mice) has been described
previously (18, 19). Crosses between these transgenic lines facilitates inducible Nurr1 gene ablation exclusively in mDA neurons by generating mice
homozygous for the conditional targeted Nurr1 allele and heterozygous for
the BAC-DAT-CreERT2 allele (cNurr1DATCreER). Littermates homozygous for
Nurr1 ﬂoxed allel harboring no copy of the BAC-DAT-CreERT2 transgene
served as controls (cNurr1Ctrl). BAC-DAT-CreERT2 mice were also crossed with
reporter mice in which the LacZ gene was introduced under control of the
ROA26 promoter that harbors a loxP-ﬂanked stop cassette (33). Mice were
kept in rooms with controlled 12-h light/dark cycles, temperature, and humidity, with food and water provided ad libitum. All animal experiments
were performed with permission from the local Animal Ethics Committee.

Cell Counting and Optical Densitometry Analysis. The total number of THpositive neurons in the VMB was measured according to the optical fractionator
principle, using the Olympus CAST-Grid stereology system. Every sixth section
covering the entire extent of the VTA and SN was included in the counting
procedure. A coefﬁcient of error of <0.10 was accepted.
LCM and RNA Sequencing. Mice were euthanized at 1 wk after the completion
of tamoxifen treatment using CO2 asphyxiation, after which brains were
quickly removed and snap-frozen in dry ice-cooled isopentane. Then 10-μmthick cryostat coronal sections of the midbrain were cut and mounted on
membrane glass slides (Zeiss 415101–4401-000) at −20 °C. Before LCM, rapid
TH staining was performed to visualize the midbrain DA neurons to be
captured. LCM was performed immediately after staining using a Leica laser
microdissection system. A total of 200 TH-positive neurons were captured
unilaterally throughout the midbrain from every 14th section per animal,
and total RNA was extracted using the Pico RNA Isolation Kit (Arcturus Engineering). The eluted volume was decreased to approximately 3 μL by
vacuum spinning. Synthesis and ampliﬁcation (18 cycles) of the cDNA library
were performed using Smart-SEq (20). These protocols are described in more
detail in SI Materials and Methods.
Behavioral Tests. Adult (3-5 mo after tamoxifen treatment) and old (11 mo
after tamoxifen treatment) mice were used to assess the motor phenotype. A
single cohort of mice was tested at each age, with a 6-d interval between
behavioral tests. Mice were randomized according to genotype. At each test,
mice were allowed to habituate to the experiment room for at least 1 h. Details
of the open-ﬁeld and pole tests are provided in SI Materials and Methods.

Histological Analyses. At early neonatal stages, mouse brains were dissected
and ﬁxed for 24 h in 4% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde (PFA). For the
isolation of adult brains, animals were anesthetized with tribromoethanol
(0.5 mg/g) and perfused through the left ventricle with body-temperature
PBS, followed by ice-cold 4% PFA. The brains were dissected and postﬁxed
overnight in 4% PFA, then cryoprotected for 24–48 h in 30% sucrose at 4 °C
before being cut into 30-μm sections on a sliding microtome or embedded in
optimum cutting temperature compound (Sakura Finetek). The embedded
brains were cryosectioned at 14 μm (midbrain) or 20 μm (forebrain) onto slides
(SuperFrostPlus; Menzel Gläser). Littermates were used in all comparative
experiments. Detailed information on immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization protocols is provided in SI Materials and Methods.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Günther Schütz, David Engblom, Pierre
Chambon, and Daniel Metzger for mouse strains, and members of the T.P.
laboratory for discussions and advice. This work was supported by grants
from the Swedish Strategic Science Foundation (to T.P., A.B., and P.S.) and
from the European Union, Seventh Framework Programme under grant
agreement mdDANeurodev (Grant 222999, to T.P.).

1. Graf T, Enver T (2009) Forcing cells to change lineages. Nature 462(7273):587–594.
2. Holmberg J, Perlmann T (2012) Maintaining differentiated cellular identity. Nat Rev
Genet 13(6):429–439.
3. Hobert O (2011) Regulation of terminal differentiation programs in the nervous
system. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 27:681–696.
4. Cheng H-C, Ulane CM, Burke RE (2010) Clinical progression in Parkinson disease and
the neurobiology of axons. Ann Neurol 67(6):715–725.
5. Wang Z, et al. (2003) Structure and function of Nurr1 identiﬁes a class of ligand-independent nuclear receptors. Nature 423(6939):555–560.
6. Perlmann T, Wallén-Mackenzie A (2004) Nurr1, an orphan nuclear receptor with essential functions in developing dopamine cells. Cell Tissue Res 318(1):45–52.
7. Zetterström RH, et al. (1997) Dopamine neuron agenesis in Nurr1-deﬁcient mice.
Science 276(5310):248–250.
8. Saucedo-Cardenas O, et al. (1998) Nurr1 is essential for the induction of the dopaminergic phenotype and the survival of ventral mesencephalic late dopaminergic
precursor neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95(7):4013–4018.
9. Castillo SO, et al. (1998) Dopamine biosynthesis is selectively abolished in substantia
nigra/ventral tegmental area but not in hypothalamic neurons in mice with targeted
disruption of the Nurr1 gene. Mol Cell Neurosci 11(1-2):36–46.
10. Le W, Conneely OM, He Y, Jankovic J, Appel SH (1999) Reduced Nurr1 expression
increases the vulnerability of mesencephalic dopamine neurons to MPTP-induced
injury. J Neurochem 73(5):2218–2221.
11. Grimes DA, et al. (2006) Translated mutation in the Nurr1 gene as a cause for Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 21(7):906–909.
12. Xu P-Y, et al. (2002) Association of homozygous 7048G7049 variant in the intron six of
Nurr1 gene with Parkinson’s disease. Neurology 58(6):881–884.
13. Zheng K, Heydari B, Simon DK (2003) A common NURR1 polymorphism associated
with Parkinson disease and diffuse Lewy body disease. Arch Neurol 60(5):722–725.
14. Chu Y, et al. (2006) Nurr1 in Parkinson’s disease and related disorders. J Comp Neurol
494(3):495–514.
15. Liu H, et al. (2012) Decreased NURR1 and PITX3 gene expression in Chinese patients
with Parkinson’s disease. Eur J Neurol 19(6):870–875.
16. Albéri L, Sgadò P, Simon HH (2004) Engrailed genes are cell-autonomously required to
prevent apoptosis in mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Development 131(13):
3229–3236.
17. Kittappa R, Chang WW, Awatramani RB, McKay RDG (2007) The foxa2 gene controls
the birth and spontaneous degeneration of dopamine neurons in old age. PLoS Biol
5(12):e325.

18. Kadkhodaei B, et al. (2009) Nurr1 is required for maintenance of maturing and adult
midbrain dopamine neurons. J Neurosci 29(50):15923–15932.
19. Engblom D, et al. (2008) Glutamate receptors on dopamine neurons control the
persistence of cocaine seeking. Neuron 59(3):497–508.
20. Ramsköld D, et al. (2012) Full-length mRNA-Seq from single-cell levels of RNA and
individual circulating tumor cells. Nat Biotechnol 30(8):777–782.
21. Anders S, Huber W (2010) Differential expression analysis for sequence count data.
Genome Biol 11(10):R106.
22. Chen J, Bardes EE, Aronow BJ, Jegga AG (2009) ToppGene Suite for gene list enrichment analysis and candidate gene prioritization. Nucleic Acids Res 37(Web Server
issue):W305-11.
23. Bergman O, et al. (2009) Do polymorphisms in transcription factors LMX1A and
LMX1B inﬂuence the risk for Parkinson’s disease? J Neural Transm 116(3):333–338.
24. Bergman O, et al. (2010) PITX3 polymorphism is associated with early-onset Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 31(1):114–117.
25. Haubenberger D, et al. (2011) Association of transcription factor polymorphisms
PITX3 and EN1 with Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 32(2):302–307.
26. Tang L, et al. (2012) Meta-analysis of association between PITX3 gene polymorphism
and Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Sci 317(1-2):80–86.
27. Kontopoulos E, Parvin JD, Feany MB (2006) Alpha-synuclein acts in the nucleus to
inhibit histone acetylation and promote neurotoxicity. Hum Mol Genet 15(20):
3012–3023.
28. Goers J, et al. (2003) Nuclear localization of alpha-synuclein and its interaction with
histones. Biochemistry 42(28):8465–8471.
29. Schell H, Hasegawa T, Neumann M, Kahle PJ (2009) Nuclear and neuritic distribution
of serine-129 phosphorylated alpha-synuclein in transgenic mice. Neuroscience
160(4):796–804.
30. Scherman D, et al. (1989) Striatal dopamine deﬁciency in Parkinson’s disease: role of
aging. Ann Neurol 26(4):551–557.
31. Grace AA, Bunney BS (1984) The control of ﬁring pattern in nigral dopamine neurons:
Single spike ﬁring. J Neurosci 4(11):2866–2876.
32. Fuke S, Kubota-Sakashita M, Kasahara T, Shigeyoshi Y, Kato T (2011) Regional variation in mitochondrial DNA copy number in mouse brain. BBA Bioenergetics 1807(3):
270–274.
33. Soriano P (1999) Generalized lacZ expression with the ROSA26 Cre reporter strain.
Nat Genet 21(1):70–71.

Kadkhodaei et al.

Measurement of DA and DA Metabolites. Twelve-month-old mice were killed
by decapitation. Brains were rapidly removed and frozen in dry ice-cooled
isopentane. Regions of interest were then collected using a tissue punch,
weighed, and kept at −80 °C until processing with HPLC.

PNAS | February 5, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 6 | 2365

NEUROSCIENCE

dendrites seen in Nurr1-deﬁcient animals and in PD patients.
Other genes that appear to be regulated by Nurr1 are of interest in
terms of neurodegeneration, including Sod1, which is essential in
protection against radical oxygen species, and ApoE, which has
been implicated as a risk factor in Alzheimers’s disease (Table S1).
It may be possible to pharmacologically target the nuclear receptor
Nurr1 via its heterodimerization partner RXR. Whether or not
Nurr1 functions alone or together with RXR to regulate key DA
neuron genes remains unknown, but an evaluation of this action
will be critical to the attempt to develop Nurr1 as a PD drug target.

