3528

Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.ae
Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, 23, 3528-3546

REVIEW ARTICLE
eISSN: 1875-533X

Impact
Factor:
3.45

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte Mediated
Inflammation in CNS Pathologies

ISSN: 0929-8673

Current
Medicinal
Chemistry
The
International
Journal for
Timely In-depth
Reviews
in Medicinal
Chemistry

BENTHAM
SCIENCE

Aparna Karthikeyan, Radhika Patnala, Shweta P. Jadhav, Ling Eng-Ang and
S. Thameem Dheen*

 

  

Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore

ARTICLE HISTORY
Received: January 21, 2016
Revised: June 21, 2016
Accepted: August 04, 2016
DOI: 10.2174/092986732366616081
4001040

Abstract: The significance of microglia and astrocytes in neural development, in maintaining synaptic connections and homeostasis in the healthy
brain is well established. Microglia are dynamic immune cells of the brain
that elicit an immune response during brain damage and also participate in
tissue repair and regeneration, while astrocytes contribute to the local inflammatory response by producing proinflammatory cytokines and resolving
neuronal damage through production of anti-inflammatory cytokines and
neurotrophic factors. Recent efforts have focused on elucidating the epigenetic mechanisms which regulate glial cell behavior in normal and pathologic
states. An important class of epigenetic regulators is microRNAs (miRNAs)
which are small non-coding RNA molecules that regulate gene expression posttranscriptionally. Certain dysregulated miRNAs contribute to chronic microglial inflammation in the brain, thereby leading to progression of neurological diseases like Alzheimer’s
disease, traumatic injury, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and stroke. Further, several miRNAs
are differentially expressed in astrocytes after ischemia and spinal cord injury. Despite
knowledge about miRNAs in neuroinflammation, little is known about effective delivery
routes and pharmacokinetic data for miRNA based therapeutics. This review summarizes the
current research on the role of miRNAs in promoting and inhibiting inflammatory response of
microglia and astrocytes in a disease-specific manner. In addition, miRNA delivery as a
therapeutic strategy to treat neuroinflammation is discussed.

Keywords: Neuroinflammation, microglia, astrocytes, microRNAs, CNS pathologies, neurodegenerative disorders.
INTRODUCTION
Microglia and astrocytes are the predominant glial
cells of the central nervous system (CNS) that perform
seminal roles in the healthy brain and during CNS pathologies [1-3]. Ramified microglia in the adult brain
are dynamic cells that constantly survey the brain parenchyma by extending and retracting their ramifications and are activated during injury and insult [4]. Further, microglia are involved in pruning excessive synapses during brain development [2], and participating
in postnatal synaptic remodeling in adulthood [5]. As*Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, MD10, 4 Medical Drive, Singapore 117594;
Tel: (65) 65163217; Fax: (65) 6778 7643
E-mail: antstd@nus.edu.sg
1875-533X/16 $58.00+.00

trocytes display complex structural and physiological
functions, providing metabolic support to neuronal
cells and structural stability to the blood brain barrier
(BBB). They also respond to neuronal signaling by
changes in their internal calcium ion concentrations [6].
Along with neurons, microglia and astrocytes are postulated to form the quad partite synapse, thus actively
engaging in information processing [7]. In addition,
there exists crosstalk between astrocytes and microglia
through secretion of several cytokines and growth factors such as Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-β)
[8] and Tumor Necrosis Factor-α (TNF-α) [9], chemokine ligand-receptor interactions [10], complement factor activation [11] and release of neurotransmitters, i.e.,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) [12]. Thus, in the
healthy brain, astrocytes and microglia actively interact
© 2016 Bentham Science Publishers

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

with each other and with neurons to maintain brain
homeostasis.
During CNS pathologies, microglia and astrocytes
elicit an inflammatory response which involves the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, as
well as growth factors that aid in tissue regeneration
and repair [13, 14]. Upon stimulation in pathological
conditions, microglia are activated; they become hypertrophic, migrate to the site of injury, release a number
of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, cytotoxic
molecules such as nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS), and also express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and costimulatory receptors
on their cell surface [15]. Activated microglia are also
capable of phagocytosing dead or dying neurons
thereby clearing neuronal debris. However, in a number of CNS pathologies, including neurodegenerative
diseases and injury, microglia are seen to be chronically activated, exacerbating inflammatory response
that contributes to tissue damage and disease progression [16, 17]. In addition, chronic activation of microglia results in an excessive release of proinflammatory
cytokines such as TNF-α, Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), Interleukin-6 (IL-6), ROS and NO, thereby worsening neuronal cell death [18].
The hallmark of astrocytic response to CNS injury
is astrogliosis which involves rapid proliferation at the
site of neuronal injury, and major cellular and morphological changes, that include hypertrophy of cells and
increased expression of the intermediate filament Glial
Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP) [13]. During chronic
inflammation, the proliferating astrocytes surround the
site of injury or lesion or the amyloid beta (Aβ) plaques
in the case of Alzheimers’ Disease (AD) brain, forming
an astroglial scar, which isolates the damaged tissue
from the healthy tissue and preventing the spread of
neuroinflammation to healthy region [19]. On the other
hand, chronic astrogliosis appears to be detrimental as
it has been found to inhibit neuronal regeneration [2022]. Taken together, reactive astrocytes and activated
microglia are first responders to insult or injury in the
CNS and prolonged activation can contribute to substantial neuronal damage by negating the tissue reparative processes during recovery in CNS pathologies.
Hence there is an immediate need to understand the
mechanisms involved in glia-mediated inflammation
towards developing potential therapies to treat neurodegenerative diseases.
The activation of glial cells in neuropathological
conditions involves epigenetic mechanisms. The major
epigenetic events include modifications of histone pro-

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3529

teins, such as methylation and acetylation, DNA methylation, and regulation of small non-coding RNAs that
modulate expression of genes. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
have recently emerged as important epigenetic modulators of gene expression and there is much evidence to
suggest that miRNAs are involved in inflammatory and
immune processes in neuropathogenesis. MiRNAs
regulates gene expression by binding to the 3’ untranslated region (UTR) of target mRNA sequences, thereby
promoting mRNA degradation or preventing protein
translation [23]. The seed region of miRNAs, a sequence of 7-8 nucleotides, show affinity for hundreds
of mRNA sequences and likewise, the 3’UTR of an
mRNA may be targeted by more than one miRNA.
Another striking feature of how miRNA exert their
functions is that one miRNA may target signaling
molecules at different levels of the same signaling cascade [24].
MiRNAs serve an important role in regulating gene
expression in the healthy brain. Surveying or “resting”
microglia express receptors that respond to neurotransmitters like Glutamate and ATP and show lowered
expression of antigen presentation molecules as compared to activated microglia found during pathology
[25]. This surveying state of microglia in the healthy
brain is attributed to a miRNA, miR-124 which targets
CCAAT enhancer-binding proteins (C/EBP-α) and
PU.1 that regulates expression of genes involved in
microglial activation [26]. Further to its role in mediating the functions of ramified microglia, miR-124 controls fate specification of neural stem cells into astrocytes and neurons by regulating levels of a histone
methyltransferase, Ezh2 [27], emphasizing its role in
glial development and functions. In addition to diverse
roles of miRNAs in the brain, spatial difference in
miRNA expression in human astrocytes, specifically, a
higher expression of pro-inflammatory miRNAs was
observed in white matter astrocytes as compared to
grey matter [28], which is crucial to understanding astrogliosis associated with pathologies such as stroke,
traumatic injury and tumors. Astrocyte-specific deletion of Dicer-1, the endoribonuclease required for the
processing of mature miRNA transcripts, resulted in
neurological decline and premature death of the mutant
mice. This was ascribed to an immature/reactive-like
state of astrocytes with impaired functions leading to
death of cerebellar Purkinje neurons [29]. Further studies show that astrocyte specific deletion of Dicer resulted in decreased number of spinal cord white matter
astrocytes, without affecting the progenitor pool of
cells, underlining the importance of miRNA biogenesis
in development and maturation of astrocytes [30].

3530 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

Given that miRNAs fine tune gene expression during
various cellular processes in a healthy brain, miRNAs
involvement in causing dysregulated gene expression
has been observed in various CNS pathologies. This
review discusses in detail the dysregulated miRNAs in
microglia and astrocytes (Fig. 1) in different CNS pathologies and how they contribute to disease maintenance and progression. The roles of specific miRNAs
in mediating astrocyte and microglia inflammatory signaling cascades are summarized. Finally, the prospect
of miRNAs as therapeutic agents and possible means
for miRNA delivery to the brain is evaluated.
MiRNAs IN CNS PATHOLOGY
Viral and Prion Infection
During insult and injury in the brain, several signaling pathways are activated in microglia and astrocytes,
contributing to a state of inflammatory response. For
instance, Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection is accompanied by infected macrophages carrying
viral particles into the CNS through the blood brain
barrier (BBB), where viral regulatory proteins like
HIV-Tat are released into the brain parenchyma [31,
32]. During the HIV infection, activated microglia participate in production of ROS through membraneassociated NADPH oxidases (NOX) which leads to
neuroinflammation. HIV-Tat treatment in microglial

Karthikeyan et al.

cells increased the intracellular ROS generation by
modulating the expression levels of miR-17, NOX-2
and NOX-4, leading to neuroinflammation [33]. Furthermore, miR-32 is seen to be upregulated in microglial cells in response to HIV-Tat proteins with a concomitant decrease in cellular TNF Receptor Associated
Factor-3 (TRAF-3) levels, a key signaling mediator
involved in suppression of immune functions mediated
by the Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRF) IRF3 and
IRF7 [34]. Significantly, HIV-Tat proteins have been
shown to inhibit a subset of miRNAs including miR181 and let-7i that regulate the Wnt-β catenin signaling
pathway in astrocytes [35], signifying an RNA interference mechanism by which HIV-Tat proteins induce
neuroinflammation [36]. Additionally, during a prion
infection, miR-146a is upregulated in activated microglia and involved in regulating microglial morphology
and phagocytic response by suppressing Nuclear Factor-kB (NFkB) and Janus kinase-Signal Transducer and
Activator of Transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway [37,
38]. The Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) infection in
humans induces neuroinflammation, resulting in longterm neurologic and psychiatric complications as well
as motor dysfunction [39]. MiR-15b and miR-19b-3p
positively regulate glial cell-mediated neuroinflammation in the JEV by suppressing Ring Finger Protein-125
(RNF-125) and RNF-11, respectively, thereby enhancing production of inflammatory cytokines [40, 41]. In

Fig. (1). MiRNAs involved in microglia- and astrocyte-mediated neuroinflammation in various CNS pathologies.

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

JEV infection, the proinflammatory miRNA-29b is
seen to promote microglial activation by targeting tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIP3), a negative regulator of NFkB signaling pathway
[42]. Thus, these studies [43] have identified potential
candidate miRNAs that can be inhibited to mitigate
JEV induced- neuroinflammation, thereby attenuating
the infection-induced neurological sequelae.
Alzheimers’ Disease
AD is a well characterized neurodegenerative disease that is associated with memory loss and behavioral
changes. Classified within the spectrum of dementia,
the main pathological feature of AD is the presence of
extracellular Aβ plaques and intracellular Tau protein
aggregates in neurons [44]. AD is accompanied by loss
of synapses and death of neurons, with a chronic inflammatory response of microglia and astrocytes [45].
Numerous studies have evaluated the miRNA profiles
of brain tissue [46, 47], blood monocytes and macrophages [48] and body fluids such as cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) and blood [49, 50], underlining a crucial role of
dysregulated miRNAs in the progression of the AD
[51-53]. Certain miRNAs that regulate immune responses such as miR-146a, miR-155, miR-125a and
miR-9 show altered expression, suggesting that disruptions in miRNA expression result in chronic activation
of glial cell during AD pathogenesis [54]. Upon exposure to Aβ peptides, glial cell-mediated immune responses in the brain occur through inflammatory signaling cascades such as NFkB and JAK-STAT signaling by activation of the Toll-Like Receptors-4 and -6
(TLRs) [55, 56]. Studies involving Aβ-treated microglia and astrocytes indicate that a prolonged expression
of proinflammatory cytokines is supported by increased
levels of miR-155 in microglia and astrocytes, through
targeting Suppressor of Cytokine Signaling-1 (SOCS1), a negative regulator of inflammatory gene response
[57].
One of the striking features of AD pathology is the
aggregation of Aβ plaques in the brain parenchyma as a
result of defective phagocytosis by microglia [58]. The
proinflammatory miRNA-34a, which is an NF-kBregulated transcript is found to be significantly increased in activated microglia and its increased levels
downregulate its target Trem-2, an innate immune receptor involved in phagocytosis, subsequently leading
to impaired phagocytosis and Aβ accumulation as observed in AD [59]. Impaired phagocytosis and an exaggerated inflammatory response by microglia in AD is
also attributed to decreased levels of presenilin, a cata-

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3531

lytic component of the γ-secretase complex that is responsible for Aβ peptide processing [60]. Studies indicate that microglia from presenilin knock-out mice
show decreased expression level of miR-146a and increased expression levels of interleukin-1 receptorassociated kinase-1 (IRAK-1) and increased NFκB
transcriptional activity. This provides evidence that
presenilin epigenetically regulates proinflammatory
function of microglia in AD brains through modulation
of miR-146a [61].
Astrogliosis as a result of exposure to Aβ plaques
during AD progression includes proliferation and hypertrophy of astrocytes, expression of chemokines and
cytokines, increased glial GFAP expression and cytoskeletal rearrangement [62]. Increased GFAP and
decreased cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK2N) are found
to be correlated with high levels of miR-125b in AD
brains. Moreover, inhibiting miR-125b decreased astroglial proliferation, supporting the possibility of targeting miR-125b as a therapeutic strategy [63]. In human astrocytes exposed to Aβ, increased levels of miR146a was reported, coupled with decreased levels of
IRAK-1 levels and increased IRAK-2 levels, both genes
being important mediators of the inflammatory TLR
signaling [64, 65]. This confirms that AD progression
is characterized by distinct events of neuroinflammation involving dysregulated expression of miRNAs in
glial cells. Targeting such events might be identified as
a potential therapeutic strategy to treat AD progression.
Epilepsy
Epilepsy is a neurological condition characterized
by recurrent spontaneous seizures that occur due to hyperexcitability and hypersynchrony of neurons in the
brain [66]. Recent studies implicate glia in the pathophysiology of epilepsy and suggest a direct relationship
between dysfunctional glia and epileptogenesis [67].
Epilepsy is associated with chronic accumulation, activation and proliferation of astrocytes and microglia
promoting hyperexcitability of neurons. In recent years,
epigenetic mechanisms that contribute to epileptogenesis have been widely reported. Several studies have
assessed the miRNA profiles of animal models of epilepsy and a set of miRNAs such as miR-146a, miR146b, miR-142 and miR-27a have been implicated in
epileptogenesis [68-70]. In rat models of status epilepticus (SE), miR-146a is upregulated in reactive astrocytes which are in close proximity with dying neurons.
It is postulated that miR-146a is involved in expression
of proinflammatory cytokines by astrocytes during epileptogenesis by targeting members of the NFkB path-

3532 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

way [71, 72]. Furthermore, the brain enriched miR-124
was found to exhibit pro- and anti-epileptogenic roles
in SE, wherein it was found to regulate both neuronal
signaling and microglial activation, thereby emphasizing the cell-type specific roles of miRNAs during disease development and progression [73-75]. Recently, a
genome wide miRNA profile of human mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (mTLE) identified a number of deregulated miRNA such as miR-92b, miR-637, or miR665 to be significantly mislocalized in the nucleus of
astrocytes of mTLE brain samples compared with cytoplasmic expression in control samples, raising speculation that mislocalization of miRNAs are responsible
for impaired regulation of molecular mechanisms in
glial cells [76]. MiR-221 and miR-222 are found to be
downregulated in astrocytes in mTLE samples corresponding to an increased expression of their target protein, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1),
which is involved in various aspects of inflammation
[77]. The differential expression of miRNAs in mTLE
tissue samples underscores the complex role of miRNAs in disease progression.
Spinal Cord Injury
Spinal cord injury (SCI) is caused by mechanical
disruption of spinal cord tissue by external blunt force,
causing neuronal damage and death, an event exacerbated by microglia- and astrocyte-mediated inflammatory response [78, 79]. A number of miRNAs have
been implicated in influencing glial cell behavior post
traumatic injury. Astrogliosis at the site of SCI involves the increased proliferation and hypertrophy of
astrocytes, resulting in the formation of a glial scar that
has both beneficial and detrimental effects [80]. The
hypertrophic astrocytes show upregulation of GFAP
expression and reduced levels of miR-145 which is
predicted to target Gfap [81]. Furthermore, miR-21 is
found to be upregulated in astrocytes during astrogliosis post SCI. Inhibition of miR-21 is found to enhance
axonal regeneration by attenuating hypertrophy and
glial scar progression, thereby identifying miR-21 as a
therapeutic target for mitigating astrogliosis during
brain injury [82].
Recent studies show that the miRNA function is vital to injury-induced proliferation of astrocytes. It is
reported that conditional deletion of Dicer-1 gene,
which is essential for mature miRNA generation, impairs activation and proliferation of astrocytes during
injury. Moreover, overexpression of miR-17-5p in
Dicer-1-null astrocytes rescues the Dicer-1 deletioninduced inhibition of astrocytic proliferation during

Karthikeyan et al.

SCI [83]. This study underlined the importance of the
miRNA processing machinery in regulating key cellular processes such as astroglial proliferation during
neuroinflammation.
Ischemic Stroke
Stroke is a cerebrovascular infarction caused by loss
of oxygenated blood to the brain tissue [84]. Stroke can
be of two types: ischemic (due to lack of blood supply)
and hemorrhagic (due to vascular bleeding) [85].
Ischemic stroke leads to rapid neuronal cell damage
and death, resulting in an inflammatory response by
microglia and astrocytes that proliferate and invade the
penumbra zone. Massive influx of activated microglia
and hypertrophic astrocytes (reactive astrogliosis) is
evident in the infarct zone after ischemic stroke.
Restoration of oxygenated blood supply to the
ischemic tissue ironically causes additional neuronal
damage by initiating an inflammatory response [86].
Inflammation that occurs post-ischemic stroke is both
deleterious and beneficial, a feature that reflects the
multifaceted response of glial cells in CNS pathology.
In this context, some studies have shed light on miRNA
changes in activated microglia and astrocytes upon
reperfusion following an ischemic injury. Certain brainspecific and inflammation-specific miRNAs such as
miR-146a and miR-21 are found to be differentially
expressed in microglia after oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) conditioning [87]. Additionally, several
miRNAs including miR-21, miR-29b and miR-30b are
upregulated in astrocytes exposed to normoxic conditioning (reperfusion) after an in vitro model of stroke.
It has been speculated that miR-29b plays a role in inducing apoptosis in neurons and astrocytes and this
could be a new avenue for investigating cellular apoptosis machinery in ischemia [88]. Further, it has been
shown that miR-21 promotes neurotoxicity by activating the TLR7 signaling pathway in neuropathogenesis
[89]. In both astrocytes and microglia, miR-21 is significantly upregulated in in vitro studies of stroke possibly playing a role in neuroinflammation. This suggests that certain miRNAs have overlapping functions
in both microglia and astrocytes during neuroinflammation in CNS pathology.
Some members of the let-7 miRNA family play
critical roles in modulating microglial and astrocyte
activation. The expression levels of let-7c-5p, a
miRNA involved in promoting alternative activation of
microglia, and miR-424 which inhibits microglial activation by arresting microglial proliferation and decreasing the secretion of proinflammatory cytokine,

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

TNF-α, are found to be downregulated in plasma samples of patients and mice after ischemic stroke [90-92].
After reperfusion in Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
(MCAO) mouse models, overexpression of let-7c-5p
suppressed neuroinflammation by decreasing expression of proinflammatory markers and apoptotic marker
such as cleaved Caspase-3. Inhibition of let-7f after
ischemic stroke conferred neuroprotection in vivo via
increase in insulin like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in microglial cells [93]. Moreover, differential expression
levels of let-7f and its target, IL-6 cytokine was discovered in the sera of ischemic stroke patients with and
without hemorrhagic complications, implicating the
role of let-7f in inflammation during massive cerebral
infarction [94]. These studies highlight the varied roles
of let-7 family in inflammation and stress the importance of understanding the roles of different miRNAs
within a family in order to develop effective therapeutic strategies to counteract stroke pathology.
Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurodegenerative disease involving demyelination of neurons, resulting in
the formation of plaques that consist of astrocytes, microglia, peripheral macrophages and T-cells [95]. An
inflammatory response mounted by microglia and astrocytes in response to demyelination is paradoxically
both neuroprotective [96, 97] and neurotoxic [98]. One
of the salient miRNAs involved in microglial activation
during MS is miR-124. Intravenous administration of
miR-124 decreased the disease progression by deactivating peripheral macrophages and restoring the “resting” state of microglia [26]. The crucial role of miR124 in regulating microglial activation in several disease pathologies, thus, makes it an attractive target for
neurotherapeutics. Furthermore, the pro-inflammatory
response of astrocytes was diminished by miR-873 inhibition in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) which is the commonly used mouse model
for the MS [99]. The suppression of EAE progression
upon miR-873 inhibition is promising and further studies may focus on the effect of miR-873 on microglial
activation in the progression of MS. A comprehensive
miRNA profiling of MS lesions has identified dysregulated miRNAs in astrocytes and immune cells and specifically, expression of several miRNAs such as miR155, miR-326 and miR-34a were shown to regulate
CD47 [100], a crucial membrane receptor involved in
the process of phagocytosis in MS [101]. The proinflammatory role of miR-155 was validated in EAE,
wherein inhibition of miR-155 resulted in decreased Thelper cells [102] and reduced expression of pro-

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3533

inflammatory cytokines in microglia and macrophages
[103]. Other differentially expressed miRNAs in MS
lesions include immune miRNAs-146a, -146b, -21and 142 and future studies could focus on understanding
their roles in glial cell activation in MS and evaluate
their potential in mitigating MS disease conditions.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a motor neuron degenerative disorder that results in progressive
paralysis and death due to respiratory failure [104].
ALS pathology in the brain is characterized by reactive
astrocytosis which is implicated in inefficient clearance
of the excitotoxic neurotransmitter glutamate and impaired secretion of neurotrophic factors, along with
microgliosis which contributes to neuroinflammation
[105]. Recently, dysregulated miRNAs in microglia
have been shown to modulate genes involved in neuroinflammation, contributing to neuroinflammatory
diseases such as ALS. About 20% of familial ALS
cases are shown to be caused by superoxide dismutase
1 (SOD1) mutations [106]. In mutated SOD1 overexpressed transgenic mice which develop symptoms like
ALS pathology, a number of immune related miRNAs
such as miR-21, miR-155, let 7a/b and miR-146b are
seen to be upregulated in microglia [107]. In addition,
miR-365 and miR-125b directly target the IL-6/STAT3
pathway in ALS associated microglia, which was reported to enhance the proinflammatory state of microglia [107]. Interestingly, inhibition of miR-155 in ALS
mice reduced the proinflammatory signaling response
in microglia [108], and improved disease condition and
survival of ALS mice significantly [109], thereby
showing promise as a potential therapeutic target.
These studies provide additional evidence to the role of
these miRNAs in modulating microglial activation in
different brain disorders.
Role of miRNAs in Regulating Inflammatory Gene
Response in Glia
The first miRNAs to be linked to microglial activation was miR-155, which is induced upon lipopolysaccharide (LPS) challenge and is found to target Socs-1, a
negative regulator of the inflammatory response, thus
regulating microglial inflammatory response by increasing the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines
and NO [110]. In Interferon-γ (IFNγ) challenged astrocytes, overexpression of IRF-3 transgene is found to
downregulate miR-155, leading to a phenotypic switch
from a proinflammatory state to an anti-inflammatory
state [111]. More recently, miR-9 was seen to play a
similar role in promoting proinflammatory response of

3534 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

activated microglial cells by targeting the monocyte
chemotactic protein-induced protein 1 (MCPIP1), an
RNase that brings about degradation of Il-1β and Il-6
mRNAs [112]. In addition, miR-200b has been identified as a novel inflammatory mediator in microglia by
interfering with the cJun/MAP Kinase pathway, a signaling cascade that is crucial to the proinflammatory
activation state of microglia [113]. These results form
the basis of new therapeutic strategies for the treatment
of microglia-mediated neuroinflammation using a
panel of miRNA regulators.
Certain miRNAs play a role in resolving a state of
neuroinflammation. Recently, miR-146a overexpression in microglial cells was shown to increase Il-10
expression which is essential in resolving a proinflammatory state of activation [37]. In IL-1β treated astrocytes, miR-146a overexpression was found to downregulate inflammatory factors like IL-6 and COX-2 by
directly targeting IRAK-1 and TRAF-6 genes, which are
key regulatory components of the NFkB pathway.
These studies indicate the induction of miR-146a as a
negative-feedback regulator during glial cell activation
[114].
Another widely studied miRNA in the context of inflammation in microglia and astrocytes is the miR-181
family of miRNAs [115, 116]. In astrocytes treated
with LPS, miR-181 was found to be downregulated,
leading to an increased production of proinflammatory
cytokines such as IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α. Similar to
the role of miR-146a in activated microglia, overexpression of miR-181 led to an increase in IL-10,
thereby, helping to resolve a proinflammatory state of
activation [117]. In microglia, miR-181c appears to be
neuroprotective as it has been shown to control the microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and apoptosis by
targeting the proinflammatory cytokine, Tnf-α [118].
A number of diseases are associated with immune
cells existing in varied state of alternative or classical
activation. The functional distinctions of classical and
alternative activation states have been established depending on the stimulus used in vitro for activation and
have emerged as an important tool for studying glial
cell activation in CNS disease progression. M1 (classical activation) phenotype is induced by proinflammatory factors like LPS and IFNγ [119-121] and
is observed in chronic pathological conditions such as
ischemic stroke and traumatic injury [122-124]. The
tissue reparative functions of glial cells are carried out
by M2 polarized cells, which are induced in vitro by
multiple stimuli such as IL-13 and IL-4 [125, 126] and
have been shown to enhance remyelination of neurons

Karthikeyan et al.

by promoting oligodendrocyte differentiation [96].
MiRNA profiling studies have determined certain
miRNAs that are crucial for the M1-M2 phenotypic
switch. In astrocytes challenged with LPS/IFNγ, miR351 and miR-125b were identified to target the TNF-α
signaling pathway by direct binding to the 3’ UTR of
Tnf-α during astrocyte activation [121]. In addition,
miR-125b targets members of the STAT signaling
pathway in ALS associated microglia and is known to
regulate astrogliosis during AD progression, underlining its importance in regulating immune functions. In
an attempt to map the miRNA profile of polarized microglia, murine microglia were exposed to LPS (classically activated) and IL-4 (alternatively activated). Low
levels of miR-124 and miR-689 were associated with
the classical activation of microglia while induction of
miR-145 and miR-214 was associated with the alternative activated phenotype of microglia, shedding light
on miRNA profiles in microglia during disease conditions displaying instances of microglial polarization
[127].
In chronic neuropathic pain, an imbalance in the
M1/M2 ratio of spinal microglia during hyperalgesia
was found to be correlated to decreased levels of miR124. Intrathecal injection of miR-124 mitigated persistent hyperalgesia by increasing expression of antiinflammatory TGFβ in spinal microglia, suggesting
that miR-124 is crucial in the M1-M2 polarization phenomenon [128]. In contrast to the M1/M2 functional
states, macrophages within glioblastomas have been
identified as unpolarized M0 phenotype, showing a
distinctive molecular signature that supports glioma
progression [129]. A number of miRNAs including
miR-146, miR-125a-5p, miR-142 and miR-155 were
found to be differentially expressed in glioblastoma
infiltrating immune cells, thereby providing potential
candidates for designing therapeutics for glioma therapy. These studies [129, 130] signal a shift in our understanding the role of immune cells within gliomas, as
glioma infiltrating microglia were previously thought
of as alternative activated cells [131-133]. The functional polarization states thereby serve as in vitro experimental paradigms to study neuroinflammation during CNS pathologies. These studies have identified
several dysregulated miRNAs (Table 1, Fig. 2) underlying common inflammatory signaling pathways in activated microglia and astrocytes in different CNS pathologies.
MiRNAs as Diagnostic and Prognostic Markers
Currently, diagnosis of neuropathologies and monitoring their progression is hindered by the absence of

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3535

Table 1. Important miRNAs and their targets that are involved in regulating astrocyte and microglia mediated neuroinflammation during CNS pathology.

CNS Pathology

Cell Type

MicroRNA
implicated

Targets
(mRNA)

Role in inflammation

References

HIV infection

Microglia

miR-32 ↑

TRAF-3

Promotes proinflammatory response

[34]

Microglia

miR-17 ↑

NOX-2, NOX-4

Results in increased intracellular ROS
generation

[33]

Astrocytes

miR-29b

Pdgf-b

Release of miRNA through exosomes
subsequently taken up by neurons

[32]

Prion infection

Microglia

miR-146a↑

-

Suppresses NFkB and JAK-STAT signaling pathways

[37, 38]

JEV infection

Microglia

miR-29b ↑

Tnfaip-3

Promotes proinflammatory response

[42]

Astrocytes
and microglia

miR-15b and
miR-19b-3p↑

Rnf-125 and

Positively regulates of inflammatory
signaling

[40, 41]

Microglia
and astrocytes

miR-155 ↑

Socs-1

Promotes production of proinflammatory cytokines

[57]

Microglia

miR-34a ↑

Trem-2

Impairs phagocytosis of Aβ peptides

[59]

Microglia
from Presenilin KO mice

miR-146a ↓

Irak-1

Exaggerated NFkB response

[61]

Astrocytes

miR-146a ↑

IRAK-1

Promotes proinflammatory response

[64]

Astrocytes

miR-125b ↑

Cdkn2a

Promotes astrogliosis

[63]

Astrocytes

miR-135a ↑

Thrombospondin-1

Suppresses angiogenic response

[54]

Astrocytes

miR-146a ↑

Irak-4, Irak-6, Traf-6

Negatively regulates inflammatory response

[64, 71]

ICAM-1

-

[77]

Alzheimer’s
Disease

Epilepsy

Rnf-11

miR-221
Astrocytes
miR-222 ↓
Spinal Cord
Injury

Ischemic stroke

Multiple Sclerosis

Astrocytes

miR-145↓

Gfap

Promotes proliferation and hypertrophy
of astrocytes

[81]

Astrocytes

miR-21 ↑

-

Suppresses beneficial response of astrocytes

[82]

Astrocytes

miR-17-5p↑

-

Regulates astroglial proliferation

[83]

Microglia

miR-124

-

Reduces microglial activation

[128]

Astrocytes

miR-29b ↑

-

Possible role in regulation of apoptosis

[88]

Astrocytes
and microglia

miR-21↑

-

Possible role in inflammation induced
apoptosis

[87]

Microglia

let-7c in plasma
samples ↓

Casp-3

Suppresses expression of proinflammatory molecules

[91]

Microglia

miR-424 in
plasma samples ↓

Tnf-α

Inhibits microglial activation

[92]

Microglia

let-7f

Igf-1

Promotes expression of antiinflammatory factor IGF-1

[93]

Microglia

miR-124 ↓

Cebp-α

Suppresses microglial activation

[26]

3536 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

Karthikeyan et al.

(Table 1) contd….

CNS Pathology

Amyotrophic
Lateral Sclerosis

Cell Type

MicroRNA
implicated

Targets
(mRNA)

Role in inflammation

References

Microglia
and astrocytes

miR-155, miR326 and miR-34a
↑

CD47

Regulates glial cell mediated phagocytosis

[100]

Microglia

miR-155 ↑

-

Promotes production of proinflammatory cytokines

[103]

Microglia

miR-125b and
miR-365 ↑

Stat-3 and Il-6 respectively

Promotes microglial activation

[107]

Microglia

miR-155 ↑

-

Promotes proinflammatory response

[108]

Fig. (2). The schematic diagram represents the key immune related miRNAs that target important genes in inflammatory signaling pathways. The cell type of the miRNA-mRNA pairing is designated by dashed box (microglia), thick box (astrocytes)
and thin box outlines (both astrocytes and microglia). [A] The TLR receptors are activated by pro-inflammatory cytokines such
as TNF-α and are mediated downstream by the IRAK and TRAF proteins, which are targeted by miR-146a. Transcription factors such as NFκB-p65 and IRF proteins are involved in the transcription of several pro-inflammatory signals that are regulated
by miRNAs as represented in the figure. [B] The CREB1 and C/EPB-α transcription factors are regulated at the mRNA level by
miR-124, which is vital for maintaining microglial homeostasis in the healthy brain. [C] ROS generation during neuroinflammation is mediated by transmembrane NADPH oxidases NOX-2 and NOX-4. [D] JAK-STAT signaling pathway is negatively
regulated by SOCS-1, the mRNA of which is targeted by miR-155. Phosphorylated STAT proteins dimerize and translocated to
the nucleus, wherein they transcribe genes such as Gfap and Bcl-2, which are targeted by miR-125b, miR-145 and miR-181a.
[E] mRNA levels of membrane receptors CD47 and Trem-2, essential components of phagocytic activity of glial cells are regulated by miRNAs like miR-34a and miR-155.

non-invasive diagnostic procedures. The discovery of
exosome-mediated miRNA exchange between mammalian cells represents an intricate system of gene network regulation yet to be used for therapeutic advan-

tage. The presence of miRNA exosomes in extracellular body fluids such as blood and CSF gives rise to the
possibility of developing miRNA based biomarkers to
track disease progression [134]. With the advent of

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

high throughput screening and next generation sequencing, extensive research has been focused on identifying robust miRNA candidates in brain tissue and
body fluids that can be developed as biomarkers for
diagnostic and prognostic value in CNS pathologies
like AD [135-138], ischemic stroke [139-141], Huntington’s disease [142, 143], neuropsychiatric ailments
[144, 145], MS [146, 147], ALS [148, 149] and Parkinsons’ Disease [150]. In CNS pathologies associated
with significant neuroinflammation, certain immunerelated miRNAs have been observed in blood serum,
plasma and CSF of patients and animal models of disease. The let-7 family of miRNAs has been shown to
mediate crucial aspects of glial cell activation in different pathologies including stroke, and brain injury and
its expression levels have been documented in circulating body fluids such as plasma, CSF and blood. Given
the therapeutic efficiency of let-7 in animal models of
stroke [93, 94, 151], further studies are required to understand its role in microglial and astrocyte activation
during traumatic brain injury [152]. Furthermore, the
miR-124 has emerged as a critical brain-enriched
miRNA that plays important roles in neuronal physiology during stroke, traumatic injury and AD and regulates inflammatory signaling pathways in activated microglia and astrocytes. In addition, this miRNA has
been observed in patient serum and plasma in brain
injury, MS and stroke and thus, may serve as a potential biomarker to evaluate disease progression. MiR146a is upregulated in activated glial cells [153, 154]
and differential levels of miR-146a have been documented in the plasma and CSF of AD patients [155,
156]. Recent studies have established that miRNA profiles accurately differentiate tumors of different origins
and predict neoplastic changes within tumors, thereby
serving as diagnostic and predictive markers for cancer
[157, 158]. The miRNA expression profile of CSF
samples from glioblastoma multiforme patients revealed the increased expression levels of miR-10b,
miR-200b and miR-21 as compared to control subjects,
highlighting a miRNA signature that can be used to
distinguish between different brain tumors [159]. However, such results must be treated with caution as there
are number of challenges associated with miRNA
based biomarker discovery. For example, miR-523-3p
found in the CSF of stroke patients is completely absent in the blood of patients and in control subjects
[140]. It is likely that altered miRNA expression in the
CSF during CNS disease progression may not represent
the glial and neuronal miRNA expression levels always. It has also been suggested that efforts to identify
miRNAs as biomarkers may be confounded by vari-

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3537

ables such as blood contamination in the CSF which
could influence the expression of miRNAs [160]. Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that miRNA profiles vary between different racial populations, complicating the process of biomarker development. There is
a pressing need for studies with larger cohorts that span
multi-racial populations to identify miRNA biomarker
for CNS pathology.
Developing miRNA Based Therapeutics to Treat
Neuroinflammation
The possibility of treating neurological disorders
with miRNA based strategies is an exciting avenue.
Modulation of miRNA levels in vitro has been
achieved by miRNA antagonists which inhibit endogenous miRNAs, and miRNA mimics which reintroduce
or overexpress specific miRNA [161]. Currently,
miRNA inhibition is possible by chemically modified
oligonucleotide sequences that pair with the mature
miRNA and prevent binding to the target gene.
MiRNA “sponges” or “erasers” have been developed to
scavenge the miRNAs continuously in cell cultures.
MiRNA sponges, containing multiple complementary
binding sites to a miRNA of interest are transfected
into cells, and behave as competitive inhibitors of the
endogenous miRNA within the cell [162]. On the other
hand, miRNA mimics or overexpression vectors are
used to rescue expression levels of repressed endogenous miRNA within the cell. Effective viral based vectors have been developed for a robust and continued
expression of miRNAs and the use of tissue specific
promoters allow for greater specificity of the miRNA
mimic vector [163, 164]. Such transgenic methods
have become potential tools to examine the miRNA
functions in various cell types and may also be developed as therapeutic agents in the future. A similar
miRNA replacement therapy involving the use of mimics of tumor suppressor miRNAs have already been
demonstrated in treatment of lung and liver cancer
lending promise to the therapeutic efficacy of this technology [165-167].
In order to effectively use miRNAs as therapeutics,
several chemical modifications (Fig. 3) have been
developed to enhance stability and half-life of the
miRNA in vivo. As a potential drug, salient features
such as biodistribution and pharmacokinetic properties
are improved by chemical modifications to miRNA
molecule. Chemical modifications may also improve
potency of the miRNA-mRNA binding by increased
loading of the miRNA into the miRNA-induced
silencing complex. The most commonly used
modification is Locked-Nucleic-Acid (LNA) modi-

3538 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

Karthikeyan et al.

Nucleic-Acid (LNA) modification wherein a 2’ 4’
Methylene bridge is added across the ribose group that
provides greater durability against nucleases [168].
Other modifications that alter the ribose group include
the 2’-O-Methyl (2’ OMe) modification that shows
lesser resistance to serum nucleases [169]. Both LNA
and 2’-O-Methyl modified anti-miR-21 showed effective inhibition of miR-21 in glioblastoma cells leading
to induction of apoptotic signaling [170]. The phosphorothioate or phosphodiester linkage increases stability against serum exonucleases while the 2’-Fluoro and
the 2’-O-methyoxyethyl are other modifications that
offer enhanced stability for in vivo [171, 172].
LNA

RNA

H
O

H
H

H

P

HO

OH

P

2' Methoxyethyl
Base

O

OH

HO

O

H

H

H

O

P

O

O

O

OH

HO

O

Base

O
H

H

H

O

Base

OH

H

P

S

OH

Base

H
O

F

P

O

OH

Base
O

O

H

H

H

P
O

O

F
OH

H

H

H
O

HO

OH

Phosphorothioate

O

F

P

F

O

Phosphodiester

O

H

H

O

H

O

H

H

OH

Base

OH

O

H

P

2' Fluoro
Base

OH

O

H

HO

OH

O

2' O-Me

O

O

O

OH

O

OH

Base
O

O

H

HO

OH

Base

OH

HO

P

in astrocytes and microglia. However, miRNA based
therapy for neuropathology has not been well established despite significant advancements in understanding the miRNA roles in neuroinflammation. A number
of hurdles are associated with administering miRNA
therapeutics to the brain. Intracerebral infusions of
miRNA therapeutics are highly invasive procedures
wherein the risks outweigh the benefits. The presence
of a vascular barrier such as the BBB complicates the
process of delivery as it restricts the entry of therapeutic molecules. Several studies currently focus on developing synthetic agents for miRNA delivery to the
brain. Polymer based routes of delivery to the brain
depend on ionic interactions between the cationic
polymer and the anionic backbone of the RNA strand
which aid in the endocytosis of the complex into the
cell [174]. In this context, cationic polymer polyethylenimines (PEI) are well characterized delivery vehicles that are endocytosed within the cell and release
DNA or RNAi molecules to regulate gene expression
[175]. Recently, miR-124a was successfully administered to the brain using modified PEI nanocarriers
[176].

F
OH

O

Fig. (3). Modifications to the nucleic acid backbone to enhance stability include the Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA)
structure and presence of a Methyl group (2’-OMe), Methyoxyethyl (2’ Methyoxyethyl) and fluoro (2’ Fluoro) modification at the 2’ position of the ribose moiety. Sulphur substitution of the oxygen atom in the phosphate linkage gives rise
to the Phosphorothioate modification.

For the last 10 years, miRNAs have been established as important regulators in various human diseases and miRNA based therapeutics have entered preclinical and clinical trials [173]. Considerable developments have been made in determining the roles of
miRNAs in regulating inflammatory signaling cascades

Dendrimers are a type of synthetic polymers with a
well-defined architecture [177]. Poly (amidoamine)
(PAMAM) dendrimers used to administer miR-21 and
5-fluorouracil to glioblastoma cells, dramatically induced apoptosis and inhibited migration of glioma
cells, indicating dendrimer based miRNA delivery as a
viable delivery system [178]. In rodent models, intracerebroventricular infusion of antagomirs and mimics
were carried out to modulate miRNA levels in astrocytes and microglia [93, 179]. In a mouse orthotopic
xenograft model of neuroblastoma, silver nanoparticles
conjugated to GD2 (cell surface antigen disialoganglioside) antibody targeted the pro-apoptotic miR-34a in
the tumor, bringing about reduced tumor growth and
increased apoptosis [180]. It is acknowledged that absence of cell specific delivery vehicles would mean that
the miRNAs are taken up by more than one cell type
and may lead to off target effects. Moreover, most of
these in vivo studies fail to address critical questions
regarding bioavailability of the miRNA and pharmacokinetic data regarding half-life of the miRNA complexes within the body. To study therapeutic efficiency
of a miRNA in the brain, a number of studies utilize
intracerebroventricular injections of miRNA mimics or
inhibitors. However, such routes of delivery are highly
invasive and given the delicate nature of the brain tissue, other routes like intranasal and intravenous injections must be explored for miRNA delivery to the
brain.

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3539

Table 2. Summary of miRNAs used as therapeutic targets through different routes of delivery in animal models of
CNS pathologies.
MiRNAs
deregulated

Disease

In vivo model

Route of delivery

Target
(mRNA)

Expression in
body fluids

miR-155

stroke

distal MCAO

Intravenous injection [182]

Rheb

-

MS

EAE

Tail vein injection- nanoparticle delivery
system [102]

SOD1G93A
ALS
Transgenic mice

Sera

Intraventricular osmotic pumps- inhibitors with phosphorothioate backbone
and alternating 2′-MOE and 2′fluoro
sugar modifications [109]

Ship1

-

let-7f

stroke

MCAO

Intracerebroventricular injection- LNA
modified antagomirs [93]

Igf-1

serum and CSF
[151]

let-7c

stroke

MCAO

Intracerebroventricular injection [91]

Caspase-3

Blood

miR-124

stroke

MCAO

Intracerebroventricular injection

Plasma [183, 184]

Chronic
pain

Spared nerve injury

Intrathecal administration [128]

-

Multiple
sclerosis

Experimental
autoencephalomyelitis

Administration using liposome complexes of the mimics and inhibitors [26]

Cebp-α

Sera [185]

Epilepsy

Pilocarpine induced
status epilepticus

Intrahippocampal injections using cholesterol conjugated 2′-OMe phosphoramidites [75]

Creb-1

-

Traumatic
injury

Spinal cord injury
by transection of the
C3 spinal cord segment and intraperitoneal injections

Chitosan/miR-124 polyplex particles
[186]

stroke

Rice–Vannucci
hypoxia-ischemia
model

Intracranial and intravenous

miR-210

miR-203

Epilepsy

intracerebroventricular injection,

Mouse chronic epilepsy

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The role of miRNAs in regulating astrocyte and microglia mediated neuroinflammation during neuropathologies has been summarized in this review. It has
been well established that miRNAs regulate expression
of genes involved in various signaling pathways in glial
cells contributing to neuroinflammation. Disrupting
these signaling cascades can be achieved by overexpression or inhibition of miRNAs (Table 2), thereby
directing glial cells to a neuroprotective phenotype engaged in repair and restoration of CNS. In recent years,
several studies focused on the interaction of miRNAs
with their target transcriptome to understand the molecular mechanism of disease progression.

intranasal [188]
Intranasal [189]

Plasma [187]

Glucocorticoid receptor

-

Glycine receptor-β
(Glrb)

[76, 190]

There is ample evidence that miRNAs have an intricate role during neurodevelopment, healthy brain function and in neuropathologies. In particular, several
mRNAs have been shown to regulate key inflammatory
pathways in both microglia and astrocytes, thereby
proving to be ideal targets for miRNA centered therapeutics and biomarker discovery for neuroinflammatory diseases. Profiling miRNAs in body fluids such as
blood and CSF will establish a biomarker catalogue
that may help diagnosis and prognosis of CNS disorders. Although miRNA therapy holds great promise,
ensuring cell specific delivery of miRNAs in the brain
in vivo remains challenging. Unlike gene therapy,
which appears to be a better therapeutic option as it

3540 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

allows targeted expression of transgene in a specific
cell type, miRNA-centered therapy is complex as one
signaling pathway is targeted by many miRNAs. The
advantage is that the miRNA–based therapy is reversible as both inhibitors and mimics can be characterized,
some even being in clinical trials for the treatment of
cancer [181]. Developing therapies involving miRNA
cocktails and combinatory miRNA-gene therapy will
have immense potential and would open new avenues
to personalized medicine for the treatment of neurological diseases. It is of clinical importance for future
studies to address this gap in knowledge in order to use
miRNAs as therapeutic strategies.

Karthikeyan et al.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

[14]

The authors confirm that this article content has no
conflict of interest.

[15]
[16]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The first author, Ms. Aparna Karthikeyan is supported by the NUS Research scholarship and the
authors would like to acknowledge the funding provided by Ministry of Education (MOE) Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier-1 Grant (WBS No: R-181000-153-112).
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

Halassa, M.M.; Fellin, T.; Haydon, P.G. The tripartite synapse: roles for gliotransmission in health and disease.
Trends Mol. Med., 2007, 13(2), 54-63.
Paolicelli, R.C.; Bolasco, G.; Pagani, F.; Maggi, L.;
Scianni, M.; Panzanelli, P.; Giustetto, M.; Ferreira, T.A.;
Guiducci, E.; Dumas, L.; Ragozzino, D.; Gross, C.T. Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain
development. Science, 2011, 333(6048), 1456-1458.
Schafer, D.P.; Lehrman, E.K.; Kautzman, A.G.; Koyama,
R.; Mardinly, A.R.; Yamasaki, R.; Ransohoff, R.M.;
Greenberg, M.E.; Barres, B.A.; Stevens, B. Microglia sculpt
postnatal neural circuits in an activity and complementdependent manner. Neuron, 2012, 74(4), 691-705.
Wake, H.; Moorhouse, A.J.; Jinno, S.; Kohsaka, S.; Nabekura, J. Resting microglia directly monitor the functional
state of synapses in vivo and determine the fate of ischemic
terminals. J. Neurosci., 2009, 29(13), 3974-3980.
Tremblay, M-E.; Stevens, B.; Sierra, A.; Wake, H.; Bessis,
A.; Nimmerjahn, A. The role of microglia in the healthy
brain. J. Neurosci., 2011, 31(45), 16064-16069.
Perea, G.; Araque, A. Glial calcium signaling and neuronglia communication. Cell Calcium, 2005, 38(3-4), 375-382.
Schafer, D.P.; Lehrman, E.K.; Stevens, B. The “quadpartite” synapse: microglia-synapse interactions in the developing and mature CNS. Glia, 2013, 61(1), 24-36.
Norden, D.M.; Fenn, A.M.; Dugan, A.; Godbout, J.P. TGFβ
produced by IL-10 redirected astrocytes attenuates microglial activation. Glia, 2014, 62(6), 881-895.
Bezzi, P.; Domercq, M.; Brambilla, L.; Galli, R.; Schols,
D.; De Clercq, E.; Vescovi, A.; Bagetta, G.; Kollias, G.;
Meldolesi, J.; Volterra, A. CXCR4-activated astrocyte glu-

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

tamate release via TNFalpha: amplification by microglia
triggers neurotoxicity. Nat. Neurosci., 2001, 4(7), 702-710.
Luo, X.; Tai, W.L.; Sun, L.; Pan, Z.; Xia, Z.; Chung, S.K.;
Cheung, C.W. Crosstalk between astrocytic CXCL12 and
microglial CXCR4 contributes to the development of neuropathic pain. Mol. Pain, 2016, 12, 12.
Lian, H.; Litvinchuk, A.; Chiang, A.C.; Aithmitti, N.;
Jankowsky, J.L.; Zheng, H. Astrocyte-microglia cross talk
through complement activation modulates amyloid pathology in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci.,
2016, 36(2), 577-589.
Shinozaki, Y.; Nomura, M.; Iwatsuki, K.; Moriyama, Y.;
Gachet, C.; Koizumi, S. Microglia trigger astrocytemediated neuroprotection via purinergic gliotransmission.
Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4329.
Farina, C.; Aloisi, F.; Meinl, E. Astrocytes are active players in cerebral innate immunity. Trends Immunol., 2007,
28(3), 138-145.
Rivest, S. Regulation of innate immune responses in the
brain. Nat. Rev. Immunol., 2009, 9(6), 429-439.
Aloisi, F. Immune function of microglia. Glia, 2001, 36(2),
165-179.
Eikelenboom, P.; Veerhuis, R.; Scheper, W.; Rozemuller,
A.J.; van Gool, W.A.; Hoozemans, J.J. The significance of
neuroinflammation in understanding Alzheimer’s disease. J
Neural Transm (Vienna), 2006, 113(11), 1685-1695.
Frank-Cannon, T.C.; Alto, L.T.; McAlpine, F.E.; Tansey,
M.G. Does neuroinflammation fan the flame in neurodegenerative diseases? Mol. Neurodegener., 2009, 4, 47.
Dheen, S.T.; Kaur, C.; Ling, E-A. Microglial activation and
its implications in the brain diseases. Curr. Med. Chem.,
2007, 14(11), 1189-1197.
Sofroniew, M.V. Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation. Trends Neurosci., 2009, 32(12),
638-647.
Shih, C.H.; Lacagnina, M.; Leuer-Bisciotti, K.; Pröschel, C.
Astroglial-derived periostin promotes axonal regeneration
after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci., 2014, 34(7), 24382443.
Deng, L.X.; Hu, J.; Liu, N.; Wang, X.; Smith, G.M.; Wen,
X.; Xu, X.M. GDNF modifies reactive astrogliosis allowing
robust axonal regeneration through Schwann cell-seeded
guidance channels after spinal cord injury. Exp. Neurol.,
2011, 229(2), 238-250.
Anderson, M.A.; Burda, J.E.; Ren, Y.; Ao, Y.; O’Shea,
T.M.; Kawaguchi, R.; Coppola, G.; Khakh, B.S.; Deming,
T.J.; Sofroniew, M.V. Astrocyte scar formation aids central
nervous system axon regeneration. Nature, 2016,
532(7598), 195-200.
Bartel, D.P. MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory
functions. Cell, 2009, 136(2), 215-233.
O’Neill, L.A.; Sheedy, F.J.; McCoy, C.E. MicroRNAs: the
fine-tuners of Toll-like receptor signalling. Nat. Rev. Immunol., 2011, 11(3), 163-175.
Ponomarev, E.D.; Shriver, L.P.; Maresz, K.; Dittel, B.N.
Microglial cell activation and proliferation precedes the onset of CNS autoimmunity. J. Neurosci. Res., 2005, 81(3),
374-389.
Ponomarev, E.D.; Veremeyko, T.; Barteneva, N.;
Krichevsky, A.M.; Weiner, H.L. MicroRNA-124 promotes
microglia quiescence and suppresses EAE by deactivating
macrophages via the C/EBP-α-PU.1 pathway. Nat. Med.,
2011, 17(1), 64-70.
Neo, W.H.; Yap, K.; Lee, S.H.; Looi, L.S.; Khandelia, P.;
Neo, S.X.; Makeyev, E.V.; Su, I.H. MicroRNA miR-124
controls the choice between neuronal and astrocyte differentiation by fine-tuning Ezh2 expression. J. Biol. Chem.,
2014, 289(30), 20788-20801.

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte
[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]
[37]

[38]
[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

Rao, V.T.; Ludwin, S.K.; Fuh, S.C.; Sawaya, R.; Moore,
C.S.; Ho, M.K.; Bedell, B.J.; Sarnat, H.B.; Bar-Or, A.; Antel, J.P. MicroRNA expression patterns in human astrocytes
in relation to anatomical location and age. J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol., 2016, 75(2), 156-166.
Tao, J.; Wu, H.; Lin, Q.; Wei, W.; Lu, X-H.; Cantle, J.P.;
Ao, Y.; Olsen, R.W.; Yang, X.W.; Mody, I.; Sofroniew,
M.V.; Sun, Y.E. Deletion of astroglial Dicer causes noncell-autonomous neuronal dysfunction and degeneration. J.
Neurosci., 2011, 31(22), 8306-8319.
Li, X.; Chen, Y.; Chi, Q.; Hu, X.; Xu, X.; Zhang, Z.; Qiu,
M.; Zheng, K. miRNAs are required for the terminal differentiation of white matter astrocytes in the developing CNS.
Neuroscience, 2016, 312, 99-107.
Li, W.; Li, G.; Steiner, J.; Nath, A. Role of Tat protein in
HIV neuropathogenesis. Neurotox. Res., 2009, 16(3), 205220.
Hu, G.; Yao, H.; Chaudhuri, A.D.; Duan, M.; Yelamanchili,
S.V.; Wen, H.; Cheney, P.D.; Fox, H.S.; Buch, S. Exosomemediated shuttling of microRNA-29 regulates HIV Tat and
morphine-mediated neuronal dysfunction. Cell Death Dis.,
2012, 3, e381.
Jadhav, V.S.; Krause, K-H.; Singh, S.K. HIV-1 Tat C
modulates NOX2 and NOX4 expressions through miR-17
in a human microglial cell line. J. Neurochem., 2014,
131(6), 803-815.
Mishra, R.; Chhatbar, C.; Singh, S.K. HIV-1 Tat Cmediated regulation of tumor necrosis factor receptorassociated factor-3 by microRNA 32 in human microglia. J.
Neuroinflammation, 2012, 9, 131.
Sardo, L.; Vakil, P.R.; Elbezanti, W.; El-Sayed, A.; Klase,
Z. The inhibition of microRNAs by HIV-1 Tat suppresses
beta catenin activity in astrocytes. Retrovirology, 2016, 13,
25.
Bennasser, Y.; Jeang, K.T. HIV-1 Tat interaction with
Dicer: requirement for RNA. Retrovirology, 2006, 3, 95.
Saba, R.; Gushue, S.; Huzarewich, R.L.; Manguiat, K.;
Medina, S.; Robertson, C.; Booth, S.A. MicroRNA 146a
(miR-146a) is over-expressed during prion disease and
modulates the innate immune response and the microglial
activation state. PLoS One, 2012, 7(2), e30832.
Saba, R.; Sorensen, D.L.; Booth, S.A. MicroRNA-146a: A
dominant, negative regulator of the innate immune response. Front. Immunol., 2014, 5, 578.
Ghosh, D.; Basu, A. Japanese encephalitis-a pathological
and clinical perspective. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis., 2009, 3(9),
e437.
Ashraf, U.; Zhu, B.; Ye, J.; Wan, S.; Nie, Y.; Chen, Z.; Cui,
M.; Wang, C.; Duan, X.; Zhang, H.; Chen, H.; Cao, S. MicroRNA-19b-3p modulates japanese encephalitis virusmediated inflammation via targeting RNF11. J. Virol.,
2016, 90(9), 4780-4795.
Zhu, B.; Ye, J.; Nie, Y.; Ashraf, U.; Zohaib, A.; Duan, X.;
Fu, Z.F.; Song, Y.; Chen, H.; Cao, S. MicroRNA-15b
modulates japanese encephalitis virus-mediated inflammation via targeting RNF125. J. Immunol., 2015, 195(5),
2251-2262.
Thounaojam, M.C.; Kaushik, D.K.; Kundu, K.; Basu, A.
MicroRNA-29b modulates Japanese encephalitis virusinduced microglia activation by targeting tumor necrosis
factor alpha-induced protein 3. J. Neurochem., 2014,
129(1), 143-154.
Thounaojam, M.C.; Kundu, K.; Kaushik, D.K.; Swaroop,
S.; Mahadevan, A.; Shankar, S.K.; Basu, A. MicroRNA 155
regulates Japanese encephalitis virus-induced inflammatory
response by targeting Src homology 2-containing inositol
phosphatase 1. J. Virol., 2014, 88(9), 4798-4810.

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30
[44]
[45]
[46]

[47]
[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

3541

Ittner, L.M.; Götz, J. Amyloid-β and tau--a toxic pas de
deux in Alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci., 2011,
12(2), 65-72.
Heppner, F.L.; Ransohoff, R.M.; Becher, B. Immune attack:
the role of inflammation in Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci., 2015, 16(6), 358-372.
Cogswell, J.P.; Ward, J.; Taylor, I.A.; Waters, M.; Shi, Y.;
Cannon, B.; Kelnar, K.; Kemppainen, J.; Brown, D.; Chen,
C.; Prinjha, R.K.; Richardson, J.C.; Saunders, A.M.; Roses,
A.D.; Richards, C.A. Identification of miRNA changes in
Alzheimer’s disease brain and CSF yields putative biomarkers and insights into disease pathways. J. Alzheimers
Dis., 2008, 14(1), 27-41.
Lukiw, W.J. Micro-RNA speciation in fetal, adult and Alzheimer’s disease hippocampus. Neuroreport, 2007, 18(3),
297-300.
Sørensen, S.S.; Nygaard, A.B.; Christensen, T. miRNA
expression profiles in cerebrospinal fluid and blood of patients with Alzheimer’s disease and other types of dementia
- an exploratory study. Transl. Neurodegener., 2016, 5, 6.
Guedes, J.R.; Santana, I.; Cunha, C.; Duro, D.; Almeida,
M.R.; Cardoso, A.M.; de Lima, M.C.; Cardoso, A.L. MicroRNA deregulation and chemotaxis and phagocytosis impairment in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement
(Amst), 2016, 3, 7-17.
Alexandrov, P.N.; Dua, P.; Hill, J.M.; Bhattacharjee, S.;
Zhao, Y.; Lukiw, W.J. microRNA (miRNA) speciation in
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and extracellular fluid (ECF). Int. J. Biochem. Mol. Biol., 2012,
3(4), 365-373.
Wang, W.X.; Rajeev, B.W.; Stromberg, A.J.; Ren, N.;
Tang, G.; Huang, Q.; Rigoutsos, I.; Nelson, P.T. The expression of microRNA miR-107 decreases early in Alzheimer’s disease and may accelerate disease progression
through regulation of beta-site amyloid precursor proteincleaving enzyme 1. J. Neurosci., 2008, 28(5), 1213-1223.
Wang, W.X.; Huang, Q.; Hu, Y.; Stromberg, A.J.; Nelson,
P.T. Patterns of microRNA expression in normal and early
Alzheimer’s disease human temporal cortex: white matter
versus gray matter. Acta Neuropathol., 2011, 121(2), 193205.
Lau, P.; Bossers, K.; Janky, R.; Salta, E.; Frigerio, C.S.;
Barbash, S.; Rothman, R.; Sierksma, A.S.; Thathiah, A.;
Greenberg, D.; Papadopoulou, A.S.; Achsel, T.; Ayoubi, T.;
Soreq, H.; Verhaagen, J.; Swaab, D.F.; Aerts, S.; De
Strooper, B. Alteration of the microRNA network during
the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol. Med.,
2013, 5(10), 1613-1634.
Ko, C-Y.; Chu, Y-Y.; Narumiya, S.; Chi, J-Y.; Furuyashiki,
T.; Aoki, T.; Wang, S-M.; Chang, W-C.; Wang, J-M.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein delta/miR135a/thrombospondin 1 axis mediates PGE2-induced angiogenesis in
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol. Aging, 2015, 36(3), 13561368.
Gorina, R.; Font-Nieves, M.; Márquez-Kisinousky, L.; Santalucia, T.; Planas, A.M. Astrocyte TLR4 activation induces
a proinflammatory environment through the interplay between MyD88-dependent NFκB signaling, MAPK, and
Jak1/Stat1 pathways. Glia, 2011, 59(2), 242-255.
Kitamura, Y.; Shimohama, S.; Ota, T.; Matsuoka, Y.; Nomura, Y.; Taniguchi, T. Alteration of transcription factors
NF-kappaB and STAT1 in Alzheimer’s disease brains.
Neurosci. Lett., 1997, 237(1), 17-20.
Guedes, J.R.; Custódia, C.M.; Silva, R.J.; de Almeida, L.P.;
Pedroso de Lima, M.C.; Cardoso, A.L. Early miR-155
upregulation contributes to neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease triple transgenic mouse model. Hum. Mol.
Genet., 2014, 23(23), 6286-6301.

3542 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30
[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]
[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

Hickman, S.E.; Allison, E.K.; El Khoury, J. Microglial
dysfunction and defective beta-amyloid clearance pathways
in aging Alzheimer’s disease mice. J. Neurosci., 2008,
28(33), 8354-8360.
Zhao, Y.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Jones, B.M.; Dua, P.; Alexandrov, P.N.; Hill, J.M.; Lukiw, W.J. Regulation of TREM2
expression by an NF-кB-sensitive miRNA-34a. Neuroreport, 2013, 24(6), 318-323.
Farfara, D.; Trudler, D.; Segev-Amzaleg, N.; Galron, R.;
Stein, R.; Frenkel, D. γ-Secretase component presenilin is
important for microglia β-amyloid clearance. Ann. Neurol.,
2011, 69(1), 170-180.
Jayadev, S.; Case, A.; Alajajian, B.; Eastman, A.J.; Möller,
T.; Garden, G.A. Presenilin 2 influences miR146 level and
activity in microglia. J. Neurochem., 2013, 127(5), 592599.
Li, C.; Zhao, R.; Gao, K.; Wei, Z.; Yin, M.Y.; Lau, L.T.;
Chui, D.; Yu, A.C. Astrocytes: implications for neuroinflammatory pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Curr.
Alzheimer Res., 2011, 8(1), 67-80.
Pogue, A.I.; Cui, J.G.; Li, Y.Y.; Zhao, Y.; Culicchia, F.;
Lukiw, W.J. Micro RNA-125b (miRNA-125b) function in
astrogliosis and glial cell proliferation. Neurosci. Lett.,
2010, 476(1), 18-22.
Cui, J.G.; Li, Y.Y.; Zhao, Y.; Bhattacharjee, S.; Lukiw,
W.J. Differential regulation of interleukin-1 receptorassociated kinase-1 (IRAK-1) and IRAK-2 by microRNA146a and NF-kappaB in stressed human astroglial cells and
in Alzheimer disease. J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285(50), 3895138960.
Ringwood, L.; Li, L. The involvement of the interleukin-1
receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs) in cellular signaling
networks controlling inflammation. Cytokine, 2008, 42(1),
1-7.
Devinsky, O.; Vezzani, A.; Najjar, S.; De Lanerolle, N.C.;
Rogawski, M.A. Glia and epilepsy: excitability and inflammation. Trends Neurosci., 2013, 36(3), 174-184.
Foresti, M.L.; Arisi, G.M.; Shapiro, L.A. Role of glia in
epilepsy-associated neuropathology, neuroinflammation and
neurogenesis. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev., 2011, 66(1-2),
115-122.
Kretschmann, A.; Danis, B.; Andonovic, L.; Abnaof, K.;
van Rikxoort, M.; Siegel, F.; Mazzuferi, M.; Godard, P.;
Hanon, E.; Fröhlich, H.; Kaminski, R.M.; Foerch, P.;
Pfeifer, A. Different microRNA profiles in chronic epilepsy
versus acute seizure mouse models. J. Mol. Neurosci.,
2015, 55(2), 466-479.
Jimenez-Mateos, E.M.; Bray, I.; Sanz-Rodriguez, A.; Engel,
T.; McKiernan, R.C.; Mouri, G.; Tanaka, K.; Sano, T.;
Saugstad, J.A.; Simon, R.P.; Stallings, R.L.; Henshall, D.C.
miRNA Expression profile after status epilepticus and hippocampal neuroprotection by targeting miR-132. Am. J.
Pathol., 2011, 179(5), 2519-2532.
Gorter, J.A.; Iyer, A.; White, I.; Colzi, A.; van Vliet, E.A.;
Sisodiya, S.; Aronica, E. Hippocampal subregion-specific
microRNA expression during epileptogenesis in experimental temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurobiol. Dis., 2014, 62, 508520.
Aronica, E.; Fluiter, K.; Iyer, A.; Zurolo, E.; Vreijling, J.;
van Vliet, E.A.; Baayen, J.C.; Gorter, J.A. Expression pattern of miR-146a, an inflammation-associated microRNA,
in experimental and human temporal lobe epilepsy. Eur. J.
Neurosci., 2010, 31(6), 1100-1107.
Omran, A.; Peng, J.; Zhang, C.; Xiang, Q.L.; Xue, J.; Gan,
N.; Kong, H.; Yin, F. Interleukin-1β and microRNA-146a
in an immature rat model and children with mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia, 2012, 53(7), 1215-1224.

Karthikeyan et al.
[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]
[78]
[79]
[80]
[81]
[82]

[83]

[84]
[85]
[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

Peng, J.; Omran, A.; Ashhab, M.U.; Kong, H.; Gan, N.; He,
F.; Yin, F. Expression patterns of miR-124, miR-134, miR132, and miR-21 in an immature rat model and children
with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. J. Mol. Neurosci.,
2013, 50(2), 291-297.
Brennan, G.P.; Dey, D.; Chen, Y.; Patterson, K.P.; Magnetta, E.J.; Hall, A.M.; Dube, C.M.; Mei, Y.T.; Baram, T.Z.
Dual and opposing roles of microrna-124 in epilepsy are
mediated through inflammatory and NRSF-dependent gene
networks. Cell Reports, 2016, 14(10), 2402-2412.
Wang, W.; Wang, X.; Chen, L.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, Z.; Liu, J.;
Jiang, G.; Li, J.; Zhang, X.; Wang, K.; Wang, J.; Chen, G.;
Luo, J. The microRNA miR-124 suppresses seizure activity
and regulates CREB1 activity. Expert Rev. Mol. Med.,
2016, 18, e4.
Kan, A.A.; van Erp, S.; Derijck, A.A.; de Wit, M.; Hessel,
E.V.; O’Duibhir, E.; de Jager, W.; Van Rijen, P.C.; Gosselaar, P.H.; de Graan, P.N.; Pasterkamp, R.J. Genome-wide
microRNA profiling of human temporal lobe epilepsy identifies modulators of the immune response. Cell. Mol. Life
Sci., 2012, 69(18), 3127-3145.
Dietrich, J.B. The adhesion molecule ICAM-1 and its regulation in relation with the blood-brain barrier. J. Neuroimmunol., 2002, 128(1-2), 58-68.
Sadowsky, C.; Volshteyn, O.; Schultz, L.; McDonald, J.W.
Spinal cord injury. Disabil. Rehabil., 2002, 24(13), 680687.
Karve, I.P.; Taylor, J.M.; Crack, P.J. The contribution of
astrocytes and microglia to traumatic brain injury. Br. J.
Pharmacol., 2015.
Karimi-Abdolrezaee, S.; Billakanti, R. Reactive astrogliosis
after spinal cord injury-beneficial and detrimental effects.
Mol. Neurobiol., 2012, 46(2), 251-264.
Wang, C-Y.; Yang, S-H.; Tzeng, S-F. MicroRNA-145 as
one negative regulator of astrogliosis. Glia, 2015, 63(2),
194-205.
Bhalala, O.G.; Pan, L.; Sahni, V.; McGuire, T.L.; Gruner,
K.; Tourtellotte, W.G.; Kessler, J.A. microRNA-21 regulates astrocytic response following spinal cord injury. J.
Neurosci., 2012, 32(50), 17935-17947.
Hong, P.; Jiang, M.; Li, H. Functional requirement of dicer1
and miR-17-5p in reactive astrocyte proliferation after spinal cord injury in the mouse. Glia, 2014, 62(12), 20442060.
Poungvarin, N. Stroke in the developing world. Lancet,
1998, 352(Suppl SIII), 19-122.
Hinkle, J.L.; Guanci, M.M. Acute ischemic stroke review.
J. Neurosci. Nurs., 2007, 39(5), 285-293, 310.
Berti, R.; Williams, A.J.; Moffett, J.R.; Hale, S.L.; Velarde,
L.C.; Elliott, P.J.; Yao, C.; Dave, J.R.; Tortella, F.C. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of inflammatory gene
expression associated with ischemia-reperfusion brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab., 2002, 22, 1068-1079.
Kong, H.; Omran, A.; Ashhab, M.U.; Gan, N.; Peng, J.; He,
F.; Wu, L.; Deng, X.; Yin, F. Changes in microglial inflammation-related and brain-enriched MicroRNAs expressions in response to in vitro oxygen-glucose deprivation.
Neurochem. Res., 2014, 39(2), 233-243.
Ziu, M.; Fletcher, L.; Rana, S.; Jimenez, D.F.; Digicaylioglu, M. Temporal differences in microRNA expression patterns in astrocytes and neurons after ischemic injury. PLoS
One, 2011, 6(2), e14724.
Yelamanchili, S.V.; Lamberty, B.G.; Rennard, D.A.;
Morsey, B.M.; Hochfelder, C.G.; Meays, B.M.; Levy, E.;
Fox, H.S. MiR-21 in Extracellular vesicles leads to neurotoxicity via TLR7 signaling in SIV neurological disease.
PLoS Pathog., 2015, 11(7), e1005032.

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte
[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]
[94]

[95]
[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]
[105]

Banerjee, S.; Xie, N.; Cui, H.; Tan, Z.; Yang, S.; Icyuz, M.;
Abraham, E.; Liu, G. MicroRNA let-7c regulates macrophage polarization. J. Immunol.. (Baltimore, Md. : 1950),
2013, 190, 6542-6549.
Ni, J.; Wang, X.; Chen, S.; Liu, H.; Wang, Y.; Xu, X.;
Cheng, J.; Jia, J.; Zhen, X. MicroRNA let-7c-5p protects
against cerebral ischemia injury via mechanisms involving
the inhibition of microglia activation. Brain Behav. Immun.,
2015, 49, 75-85.
Zhao, H.; Wang, J.; Gao, L.; Wang, R.; Liu, X.; Gao, Z.;
Tao, Z.; Xu, C.; Song, J.; Ji, X.; Luo, Y. MiRNA-424 protects against permanent focal cerebral ischemia injury in
mice involving suppressing microglia activation. Stroke,
2013, 44(6), 1706-1713.
Selvamani, A.; Sathyan, P.; Miranda, R.C.; Sohrabji, F. An
antagomir to microRNA Let7f promotes neuroprotection in
an ischemic stroke model. PLoS One, 2012, 7(2), e32662.
Gong, Z.; Zhao, S.; Zhang, J.; Xu, X.; Guan, W.; Jing, L.;
Liu, P.; Lu, J.; Teng, J.; Peng, T.; Jia, Y. Initial research on
the relationship between let-7 family members in the serum
and massive cerebral infarction. J. Neurol. Sci., 2016, 361,
150-157.
Wingerchuk, D.M.; Lucchinetti, C.F.; Noseworthy, J.H.
Multiple sclerosis: current pathophysiological concepts.
Lab. Invest., 2001, 81(3), 263-281.
Miron, V.E.; Boyd, A.; Zhao, J-W.; Yuen, T.J.; Ruckh,
J.M.; Shadrach, J.L.; van Wijngaarden, P.; Wagers, A.J.;
Williams, A.; Franklin, R.J.; ffrench-Constant, C. M2 microglia and macrophages drive oligodendrocyte differentiation during CNS remyelination. Nat. Neurosci., 2013, 16(9),
1211-1218.
Kotter, M.R.; Zhao, C.; van Rooijen, N.; Franklin, R.J.
Macrophage-depletion induced impairment of experimental
CNS remyelination is associated with a reduced oligodendrocyte progenitor cell response and altered growth factor
expression. Neurobiol. Dis., 2005, 18(1), 166-175.
Singh, S.; Metz, I.; Amor, S.; van der Valk, P.; Stadelmann,
C.; Brück, W. Microglial nodules in early multiple sclerosis
white matter are associated with degenerating axons. Acta
Neuropathol., 2013, 125(4), 595-608.
Liu, X.; He, F.; Pang, R.; Zhao, D.; Qiu, W.; Shan, K.;
Zhang, J.; Lu, Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y. Interleukin-17 (IL-17)induced microRNA 873 (miR-873) contributes to the
pathogenesis of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by targeting A20 ubiquitin-editing enzyme. J. Biol.
Chem., 2014, 289(42), 28971-28986.
Junker, A.; Krumbholz, M.; Eisele, S.; Mohan, H.; Augstein, F.; Bittner, R.; Lassmann, H.; Wekerle, H.; Hohlfeld,
R.; Meinl, E. MicroRNA profiling of multiple sclerosis lesions identifies modulators of the regulatory protein CD47.
Brain, 2009, 132(Pt 12), 3342-3352.
Jones, R.S.; Minogue, A.M.; Connor, T.J.; Lynch, M.A.
Amyloid-β-induced astrocytic phagocytosis is mediated by
CD36, CD47 and RAGE. J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol.,
2013, 8(1), 301-311.
Zhang, J.; Cheng, Y.; Cui, W.; Li, M.; Li, B.; Guo, L. MicroRNA-155 modulates Th1 and Th17 cell differentiation
and is associated with multiple sclerosis and experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Neuroimmunol., 2014,
266(1-2), 56-63.
Moore, C.S.; Rao, V.T.; Durafourt, B.A.; Bedell, B.J.;
Ludwin, S.K.; Bar-Or, A.; Antel, J.P. miR-155 as a multiple
sclerosis-relevant regulator of myeloid cell polarization.
Ann. Neurol., 2013, 74(5), 709-720.
Rowland, L.P.; Shneider, N.A. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. N. Engl. J. Med., 2001, 344(22), 1688-1700.
Lasiene, J.; Yamanaka, K. Glial cells in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Neurol. Res. Int., 2011, 2011, 718987.

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

3543

[106] Rosen, D.R.; Siddique, T.; Patterson, D.; Figlewicz, D.A.;
Sapp, P.; Hentati, A.; Donaldson, D.; Goto, J.; O’Regan,
J.P.; Deng, H.X. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature, 1993, 362(6415), 59-62.
[107] Parisi, C.; Arisi, I.; D’Ambrosi, N.; Storti, A.E.; Brandi, R.;
D’Onofrio, M.; Volonté, C. Dysregulated microRNAs in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis microglia modulate genes
linked to neuroinflammation. Cell Death Dis., 2013, 4,
e959.
[108] Butovsky, O.; Jedrychowski, M.P.; Cialic, R.; Krasemann,
S.; Murugaiyan, G.; Fanek, Z.; Greco, D.J.; Wu, P.M.;
Doykan, C.E.; Kiner, O.; Lawson, R.J.; Frosch, M.P.; Pochet, N.; Fatimy, R.E.; Krichevsky, A.M.; Gygi, S.P.;
Lassmann, H.; Berry, J.; Cudkowicz, M.E.; Weiner, H.L.
Targeting miR-155 restores abnormal microglia and attenuates disease in SOD1 mice. Ann. Neurol., 2015, 77(1), 7599.
[109] Koval, E.D.; Shaner, C.; Zhang, P.; du Maine, X.; Fischer,
K.; Tay, J.; Chau, B.N.; Wu, G.F.; Miller, T.M. Method for
widespread microRNA-155 inhibition prolongs survival in
ALS-model mice. Hum. Mol. Genet., 2013, 22(20), 41274135.
[110] Cardoso, A.L.; Guedes, J.R.; Pereira de Almeida, L.;
Pedroso de Lima, M.C. miR-155 modulates microgliamediated immune response by down-regulating SOCS-1
and promoting cytokine and nitric oxide production. Immunology, 2012, 135(1), 73-88.
[111] Tarassishin, L.; Loudig, O.; Bauman, A.; Shafit-Zagardo,
B.; Suh, H.S.; Lee, S.C. Interferon regulatory factor 3 inhibits astrocyte inflammatory gene expression through suppression of the proinflammatory miR-155 and miR-155.
Glia, 2011, 59(12), 1911-1922.
[112] Yao, H.; Ma, R.; Yang, L.; Hu, G.; Chen, X.; Duan, M.;
Kook, Y.; Niu, F.; Liao, K.; Fu, M.; Hu, G.; Kolattukudy,
P.; Buch, S. MiR-9 promotes microglial activation by targeting MCPIP1. Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4386.
[113] Jadhav, S.P.; Kamath, S.P.; Choolani, M.; Lu, J.; Dheen,
S.T. microRNA-200b modulates microglia-mediated neuroinflammation via the cJun/MAPK pathway. J. Neurochem., 2014, 130(3), 388-401.
[114] Iyer, A.; Zurolo, E.; Prabowo, A.; Fluiter, K.; Spliet, W.G.;
van Rijen, P.C.; Gorter, J.A.; Aronica, E. MicroRNA-146a:
a key regulator of astrocyte-mediated inflammatory response. PLoS One, 2012, 7(9), e44789.
[115] Ouyang, Y.B.; Lu, Y.; Yue, S.; Giffard, R.G. miR-181 targets multiple Bcl-2 family members and influences apoptosis and mitochondrial function in astrocytes. Mitochondrion, 2012, 12(2), 213-219.
[116] Zhang, L.; Li, Y.J.; Wu, X.Y.; Hong, Z.; Wei, W.S. MicroRNA-181c negatively regulates the inflammatory response in oxygen-glucose-deprived microglia by targeting
Toll-like receptor 4. J. Neurochem., 2015, 132(6), 713-723.
[117] Hutchison, E.R.; Kawamoto, E.M.; Taub, D.D.; Lal, A.;
Abdelmohsen, K.; Zhang, Y.; Wood, W.H., III; Lehrmann,
E.; Camandola, S.; Becker, K.G.; Gorospe, M.; Mattson,
M.P. Evidence for miR-181 involvement in neuroinflammatory responses of astrocytes. Glia, 2013, 61(7), 1018-1028.
[118] Zhang, L.; Dong, L-Y.; Li, Y-J.; Hong, Z.; Wei, W-S. The
microRNA miR-181c controls microglia-mediated neuronal
apoptosis by suppressing tumor necrosis factor. J. Neuroinflammation, 2012, 9, 211.
[119] Kobayashi, K.; Imagama, S.; Ohgomori, T.; Hirano, K.;
Uchimura, K.; Sakamoto, K.; Hirakawa, A.; Takeuchi, H.;
Suzumura, A.; Ishiguro, N.; Kadomatsu, K. Minocycline selectively inhibits M1 polarization of microglia. Cell Death
Dis., 2013, 4, e525.

3544 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30
[120] Jang, E.; Kim, J.H.; Lee, S.; Kim, J.H.; Seo, J.W.; Jin, M.;
Lee, M.G.; Jang, I.S.; Lee, W.H.; Suk, K. Phenotypic polarization of activated astrocytes: the critical role of
lipocalin-2 in the classical inflammatory activation of astrocytes. J. Immunol., 2013, 191(10), 5204-5219.
[121] Mor, E.; Cabilly, Y.; Goldshmit, Y.; Zalts, H.; Modai, S.;
Edry, L.; Elroy-Stein, O.; Shomron, N. Species-specific microRNA roles elucidated following astrocyte activation.
Nucleic Acids Res., 2011, 39(9), 3710-3723.
[122] Kroner, A.; Greenhalgh, A.D.; Zarruk, J.G.; Passos Dos
Santos, R.; Gaestel, M.; David, S. TNF and increased intracellular iron alter macrophage polarization to a detrimental
M1 phenotype in the injured spinal cord. Neuron, 2014,
83(5), 1098-1116.
[123] Xu, Y.; Qian, L.; Zong, G.; Ma, K.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, H.; Li,
N.; Yang, Q.; Bai, H.; Ben, J.; Li, X.; Xu, Y.; Chen, Q.
Class A scavenger receptor promotes cerebral ischemic injury by pivoting microglia/macrophage polarization. Neuroscience, 2012, 218, 35-48.
[124] Tang, Z.; Gan, Y.; Liu, Q.; Yin, J-X.; Liu, Q.; Shi, J.; Shi,
F-D. CX3CR1 deficiency suppresses activation and neurotoxicity of microglia/macrophage in experimental ischemic
stroke. J. Neuroinflammation, 2014, 11(1), 26.
[125] Zhao, X.; Wang, H.; Sun, G.; Zhang, J.; Edwards, N.J.;
Aronowski, J. Neuronal interleukin-4 as a modulator of microglial pathways and ischemic brain damage. J. Neurosci.,
2015, 35(32), 11281-11291.
[126] Zhou, X.; Spittau, B.; Krieglstein, K. TGFβ signalling plays
an important role in IL4-induced alternative activation of
microglia. J. Neuroinflammation, 2012, 9(1), 210.
[127] Freilich, R.W.; Woodbury, M.E.; Ikezu, T. Integrated expression profiles of mRNA and miRNA in polarized primary murine microglia. PLoS One, 2013, 8(11), e79416.
[128] Willemen, H.L.; Huo, X-J.; Mao-Ying, Q-L.; Zijlstra, J.;
Heijnen, C.J.; Kavelaars, A. MicroRNA-124 as a novel
treatment for persistent hyperalgesia. J. Neuroinflammation,
2012, 9, 143.
[129] Gabrusiewicz, K.; Rodriguez, B.; Wei, J.; Hashimoto, Y.;
Healy, L.M.; Maiti, S.N.; Thomas, G.; Zhou, S.; Wang, Q.;
Elakkad, A.; Liebelt, B.D.; Yaghi, N.K.; Ezhilarasan, R.;
Huang, N.; Weinberg, J.S.; Prabhu, S.S.; Rao, G.; Sawaya,
R.; Langford, L.A.; Bruner, J.M.; Fuller, G.N.; Bar-Or, A.;
Li, W.; Colen, R.R.; Curran, M.A.; Bhat, K.P.; Antel, J.P.;
Cooper, L.J.; Sulman, E.P.; Heimberger, A.B. Glioblastoma-infiltrated innate immune cells resemble M0 macrophage phenotype. JCI Insight, 2016, 1(2), pii: e85841.
[130] Szulzewsky, F.; Pelz, A.; Feng, X.; Synowitz, M.; Markovic, D.; Langmann, T.; Holtman, I.R.; Wang, X.; Eggen,
B.J.; Boddeke, H.W.; Hambardzumyan, D.; Wolf, S.A.;
Kettenmann, H. Glioma-associated microglia/macrophages
display an expression profile different from M1 and M2 polarization and highly express Gpnmb and Spp1. PLoS One,
2015, 10(2), e0116644.
[131] Komohara, Y.; Ohnishi, K.; Kuratsu, J.; Takeya, M. Possible involvement of the M2 anti-inflammatory macrophage
phenotype in growth of human gliomas. J. Pathol., 2008,
216(1), 15-24.
[132] Ellert-Miklaszewska, A.; Dabrowski, M.; Lipko, M.; Sliwa,
M.; Maleszewska, M.; Kaminska, B. Molecular definition
of the pro-tumorigenic phenotype of glioma-activated microglia. Glia, 2013, 61(7), 1178-1190.
[133] Gabrusiewicz, K.; Ellert-Miklaszewska, A.; Lipko, M.;
Sielska, M.; Frankowska, M.; Kaminska, B. Characteristics
of the alternative phenotype of microglia/macrophages and
its modulation in experimental gliomas. PLoS One, 2011,
6(8), e23902.
[134] Valadi, H.; Ekström, K.; Bossios, A.; Sjöstrand, M.; Lee,
J.J.; Lötvall, J.O. Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs

Karthikeyan et al.

[135]
[136]

[137]
[138]

[139]

[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

[146]

[147]

[148]

and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange
between cells. Nat. Cell Biol., 2007, 9(6), 654-659.
Zhao, Y.; Alexandrov, P.N.; Lukiw, W.J. Anti-microRNAs
as novel therapeutic agents in the clinical management of
Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Neurosci., 2016, 10, 59.
Cheng, L.; Doecke, J.D.; Sharples, R.A.; Villemagne, V.L.;
Fowler, C.J.; Rembach, A.; Martins, R.N.; Rowe, C.C.;
Macaulay, S.L.; Masters, C.L.; Hill, A.F. Prognostic serum
miRNA biomarkers associated with Alzheimer’s disease
shows concordance with neuropsychological and neuroimaging assessment. Mol. Psychiatry, 2015, 20(10), 11881196.
Geekiyanage, H.; Jicha, G.A.; Nelson, P.T.; Chan, C. Blood
serum miRNA: non-invasive biomarkers for Alzheimer’s
disease. Exp. Neurol., 2012, 235(2), 491-496.
Tan, L.; Yu, J.T.; Tan, M.S.; Liu, Q.Y.; Wang, H.F.; Zhang,
W.; Jiang, T.; Tan, L. Genome-wide serum microRNA expression profiling identifies serum biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis., 2014, 40(4), 10171027.
Liu, Y.; Zhang, J.; Han, R.; Liu, H.; Sun, D.; Liu, X. Downregulation of serum brain specific microRNA is associated
with inflammation and infarct volume in acute ischemic
stroke. J. Clin. Neurosci., 2015, 22(2), 291-295.
Sørensen, S.S.; Nygaard, A-B.; Nielsen, M-Y.; Jensen, K.;
Christensen, T. miRNA expression profiles in cerebrospinal
fluid and blood of patients with acute ischemic stroke.
Transl. Stroke Res., 2014, 5(6), 711-718.
Li, P.; Teng, F.; Gao, F.; Zhang, M.; Wu, J.; Zhang, C.
Identification of circulating microRNAs as potential biomarkers for detecting acute ischemic stroke. Cell. Mol.
Neurobiol., 2015, 35(3), 433-447.
Hoss, A.G.; Lagomarsino, V.N.; Frank, S.; Hadzi, T.C.;
Myers, R.H.; Latourelle, J.C. Study of plasma-derived
miRNAs mimic differences in Huntington’s disease brain.
Mov. Disord., 2015, 30(14), 1961-1964.
Díez-Planelles, C.; Sánchez-Lozano, P.; Crespo, M.C.; GilZamorano, J.; Ribacoba, R.; González, N.; Suárez, E.;
Martínez-Descals, A.; Martínez-Camblor, P.; Álvarez, V.;
Martín-Hernández, R.; Huerta-Ruíz, I.; González-García, I.;
Cosgaya, J.M.; Visioli, F.; Dávalos, A.; Iglesias-Gutiérrez,
E.; Tomás-Zapico, C. Circulating microRNAs in
Huntington’s disease: Emerging mediators in metabolic impairment. Pharmacol. Res., 2016, 108, 102-110.
Sun, X.Y.; Zhang, J.; Niu, W.; Guo, W.; Song, H.T.; Li,
H.Y.; Fan, H.M.; Zhao, L.; Zhong, A.F.; Dai, Y.H.; Guo,
Z.M.; Zhang, L.Y.; Lu, J.; Zhang, Q.L. A preliminary
analysis of microRNA as potential clinical biomarker for
schizophrenia. Am. J. Med. Genet. B. Neuropsychiatr.
Genet., 2015, 168B(3), 170-178.
Zhang, Y.; Cheng, L.; Chen, Y.; Yang, G.Y.; Liu, J.; Zeng,
L. Clinical predictor and circulating microRNA profile expression in patients with early onset post-stroke depression.
J. Affect. Disord., 2016, 193, 51-58.
Gandhi, R.; Healy, B.; Gholipour, T.; Egorova, S.; Musallam, A.; Hussain, M.S.; Nejad, P.; Patel, B.; Hei, H.;
Khoury, S.; Quintana, F.; Kivisakk, P.; Chitnis, T.; Weiner,
H.L. Circulating microRNAs as biomarkers for disease
staging in multiple sclerosis. Ann. Neurol., 2013, 73(6),
729-740.
Guerau-de-Arellano, M.; Alder, H.; Ozer, H.G.; LovettRacke, A.; Racke, M.K. miRNA profiling for biomarker
discovery in multiple sclerosis: from microarray to deep sequencing. J. Neuroimmunol., 2012, 248(1-2), 32-39.
Benigni, M.; Ricci, C.; Jones, A.R.; Giannini, F.; AlChalabi, A.; Battistini, S. Identification of miRNAs as potential biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid from amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis patients. Neuromolecular Med., 2016.

MicroRNAs: Key Players in Microglia and Astrocyte

Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

[149] Takahashi, I.; Hama, Y.; Matsushima, M.; Hirotani, M.;
Kano, T.; Hohzen, H.; Yabe, I.; Utsumi, J.; Sasaki, H. Identification of plasma microRNAs as a biomarker of sporadic
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis. Mol. Brain, 2015, 8(1), 67.
[150] Khoo, S.K.; Petillo, D.; Kang, U.J.; Resau, J.H.; Berryhill,
B.; Linder, J.; Forsgren, L.; Neuman, L.A.; Tan, A.C.
Plasma-based circulating MicroRNA biomarkers for Parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons Dis., 2012, 2(4), 321-331.
[151] Peng, G.; Yuan, Y.; Wu, S.; He, F.; Hu, Y.; Luo, B. MicroRNA let-7e is a potential circulating biomarker of acute
stage ischemic stroke. Transl. Stroke Res., 2015, 6(6), 437445.
[152] Balakathiresan, N.; Bhomia, M.; Chandran, R.; Chavko, M.;
McCarron, R.M.; Maheshwari, R.K. MicroRNA let-7i is a
promising serum biomarker for blast-induced traumatic
brain injury. J. Neurotrauma, 2012, 29(7), 1379-1387.
[153] Li, Y.Y.; Cui, J.G.; Dua, P.; Pogue, A.I.; Bhattacharjee, S.;
Lukiw, W.J. Differential expression of miRNA-146aregulated inflammatory genes in human primary neural, astroglial and microglial cells. Neurosci. Lett., 2011, 499(2),
109-113.
[154] Lukiw, W.J.; Zhao, Y.; Cui, J.G. An NF-kappaB-sensitive
micro RNA-146a-mediated inflammatory circuit in Alzheimer disease and in stressed human brain cells. J. Biol.
Chem., 2008, 283(46), 31315-31322.
[155] Denk, J.; Boelmans, K.; Siegismund, C.; Lassner, D.; Arlt,
S.; Jahn, H. MicroRNA profiling of CSF reveals potential
biomarkers to detect alzheimer‘s disease. PLoS One, 2015,
10(5), e0126423.
[156] Kiko, T.; Nakagawa, K.; Tsuduki, T.; Furukawa, K.; Arai,
H.; Miyazawa, T. MicroRNAs in plasma and cerebrospinal
fluid as potential markers for Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers Dis., 2014, 39(2), 253-259.
[157] Lu, J.; Getz, G.; Miska, E.A.; Alvarez-Saavedra, E.; Lamb,
J.; Peck, D.; Sweet-Cordero, A.; Ebert, B.L.; Mak, R.H.;
Ferrando, A.A.; Downing, J.R.; Jacks, T.; Horvitz, H.R.;
Golub, T.R. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human
cancers. Nature, 2005, 435(7043), 834-838.
[158] du Rieu, M.C.; Torrisani, J.; Selves, J.; Al Saati, T.; Souque, A.; Dufresne, M.; Tsongalis, G.J.; Suriawinata, A.A.;
Carrère, N.; Buscail, L.; Cordelier, P. MicroRNA-21 is induced early in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma precursor
lesions. Clin. Chem., 2010, 56(4), 603-612.
[159] Teplyuk, N.M.; Mollenhauer, B.; Gabriely, G.; Giese, A.;
Kim, E.; Smolsky, M.; Kim, R.Y.; Saria, M.G.; Pastorino,
S.; Kesari, S.; Krichevsky, A.M. MicroRNAs in cerebrospinal fluid identify glioblastoma and metastatic brain cancers
and reflect disease activity. Neuro-oncol., 2012, 14(6), 689700.
[160] Müller, M.; Jäkel, L.; Bruinsma, I.B.; Claassen, J.A.; Kuiperij, H.B.; Verbeek, M.M. microRNA-29a is a candidate
biomarker for Alzheimer’s disease in cell-free cerebrospinal
fluid. Mol. Neurobiol., 2016, 53(5), 2894-2899.
[161] van Rooij, E.; Marshall, W.S.; Olson, E.N. Toward microRNA-based therapeutics for heart disease: the sense in
antisense. Circ. Res., 2008, 103(9), 919-928.
[162] Ebert, M.S.; Neilson, J.R.; Sharp, P.A. MicroRNA sponges:
competitive inhibitors of small RNAs in mammalian cells.
Nat. Methods, 2007, 4(9), 721-726.
[163] Kota, J.; Chivukula, R.R.; Donnell, K.a.O.; Wentzel, E.a.;
Chrystal, L.; Hwang, H.-W.; Chang, T.-C.; Vivekanandan,
P.; Clark, K.R.; Mendell, J.R.; Mendell, J.T. Therapeutic
delivery of miR-26a inhibits cancer cell proliferation and
induces tumor-specific apoptosis. 2010, 137, 1005-1017.
[164] Moshiri, F.; Callegari, E.; D’Abundo, L.; Corrà, F.; Lupini,
L.; Sabbioni, S.; Negrini, M. Inhibiting the oncogenic mir221 by microRNA sponge: toward microRNA-based thera-

peutics for hepatocellular carcinoma. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. Bed Bench, 2014, 7(1), 43-54.
Bader, A.G.; Brown, D.; Winkler, M. The promise of microRNA replacement therapy. Cancer Res., 2010, 70(18),
7027-7030.
Esquela-Kerscher, A.; Trang, P.; Wiggins, J.F.; Patrawala,
L.; Cheng, A.; Ford, L.; Weidhaas, J.B.; Brown, D.; Bader,
A.G.; Slack, F.J. The let-7 microRNA reduces tumor
growth in mouse models of lung cancer. Cell Cycle, 2008,
7(6), 759-764.
Trang, P.; Wiggins, J.F.; Daige, C.L.; Cho, C.; Omotola,
M.; Brown, D.; Weidhaas, J.B.; Bader, A.G.; Slack, F.J.
Systemic delivery of tumor suppressor microRNA mimics
using a neutral lipid emulsion inhibits lung tumors in mice.
Mol. Ther., 2011, 19(6), 1116-1122.
Elmén, J.; Thonberg, H.; Ljungberg, K.; Frieden, M.;
Westergaard, M.; Xu, Y.; Wahren, B.; Liang, Z.; Ørum, H.;
Koch, T.; Wahlestedt, C. Locked nucleic acid (LNA) mediated improvements in siRNA stability and functionality.
Nucleic Acids Res., 2005, 33(1), 439-447.
Lennox, K.A.; Behlke, M.A. A direct comparison of antimicroRNA oligonucleotide potency. Pharm. Res., 2010,
27(9), 1788-1799.
Chan, J.A.; Krichevsky, A.M.; Kosik, K.S. MicroRNA-21
is an antiapoptotic factor in human glioblastoma cells. Cancer Res., 2005, 65(14), 6029-6033.
Krützfeldt, J.; Rajewsky, N.; Braich, R.; Rajeev, K.G.;
Tuschl, T.; Manoharan, M.; Stoffel, M. Silencing of microRNAs in vivo with ‘antagomirs’. Nature, 2005,
438(7068), 685-689.
Czauderna, F.; Fechtner, M.; Dames, S.; Aygün, H.; Klippel, A.; Pronk, G.J.; Giese, K.; Kaufmann, J. Structural
variations and stabilising modifications of synthetic siRNAs
in mammalian cells. Nucleic Acids Res., 2003, 31(11),
2705-2716.
Broderick, J.A.; Zamore, P.D. MicroRNA therapeutics.
Gene Ther., 2011, 18(12), 1104-1110.
Molinaro, R.; Wolfram, J.; Federico, C.; Cilurzo, F.; Di
Marzio, L.; Ventura, C.A.; Carafa, M.; Celia, C.; Fresta, M.
Polyethylenimine and chitosan carriers for the delivery of
RNA interference effectors. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv.,
2013, 10(12), 1653-1668.
Schäfer, J.; Höbel, S.; Bakowsky, U.; Aigner, A. Liposomepolyethylenimine complexes for enhanced DNA and siRNA
delivery. Biomaterials, 2010, 31(26), 6892-6900.
Hwang, D.W.; Son, S.; Jang, J.; Youn, H.; Lee, S.; Lee, D.;
Lee, Y.S.; Jeong, J.M.; Kim, W.J.; Lee, D.S. A braintargeted rabies virus glycoprotein-disulfide linked PEI
nanocarrier for delivery of neurogenic microRNA. Biomaterials, 2011, 32(21), 4968-4975.
Liu, X.; Liu, C.; Catapano, C.V.; Peng, L.; Zhou, J.; Rocchi, P. Structurally flexible triethanolamine-core poly(amidoamine) dendrimers as effective nanovectors to deliver
RNAi-based therapeutics. Biotechnol. Adv., 2014, 32(4),
844-852.
Ren, Y.; Kang, C.S.; Yuan, X.B.; Zhou, X.; Xu, P.; Han, L.;
Wang, G.X.; Jia, Z.; Zhong, Y.; Yu, S.; Sheng, J.; Pu, P.Y.
Co-delivery of as-miR-21 and 5-FU by poly(amidoamine)
dendrimer attenuates human glioma cell growth in vitro. J.
Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed., 2010, 21(3), 303-314.
Ouyang, Y-B.; Lu, Y.; Yue, S.; Xu, L-J.; Xiong, X-X.;
White, R.E.; Sun, X.; Giffard, R.G. miR-181 regulates
GRP78 and influences outcome from cerebral ischemia in
vitro and in vivo. Neurobiol. Dis., 2012, 45(1), 555-563.
Tivnan, A.; Orr, W.S.; Gubala, V.; Nooney, R.; Williams,
D.E.; McDonagh, C.; Prenter, S.; Harvey, H.; DomingoFernández, R.; Bray, I.M.; Piskareva, O.; Ng, C.Y.; Lode,
H.N.; Davidoff, A.M.; Stallings, R.L. Inhibition of neuro-

[165]
[166]

[167]

[168]

[169]
[170]
[171]

[172]

[173]
[174]

[175]
[176]

[177]

[178]

[179]

[180]

3545

3546 Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2016, Vol. 23, No. 30

[181]
[182]

[183]

[184]

[185]
[186]

blastoma tumor growth by targeted delivery of microRNA34a using anti-disialoganglioside GD2 coated nanoparticles.
PLoS One, 2012, 7(5), e38129.
Bader, A.G. miR-34 - a microRNA replacement therapy is
headed to the clinic. Front. Genet., 2012, 3, 120.
Caballero-Garrido, E.; Pena-Philippides, J.C.; Lordkipanidze, T.; Bragin, D.; Yang, Y.; Erhardt, E.B.; Roitbak,
T. In Vivo Inhibition of miR-155 Promotes Recovery after
Experimental Mouse Stroke. J. Neurosci., 2015, 35(36),
12446-12464.
Jeyaseelan, K.; Lim, K.Y.; Armugam, A. MicroRNA expression in the blood and brain of rats subjected to transient
focal ischemia by middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke,
2008, 39(3), 959-966.
Rainer, T.H.; Leung, L.Y.; Chan, C.P.; Leung, Y.K.;
Abrigo, J.M.; Wang, D.; Graham, C.A. Plasma miR-124-3p
and miR-16 concentrations as prognostic markers in acute
stroke. Clin. Biochem., 2016, 49(9), 663-668.
Vistbakka, J.; Elovaara, I.; Lehtimäki, T.; Hagman, S. Circulating microRNAs as biomarkers in progressive multiple
sclerosis; Mult. Scler. J., 2016, p. 1352458516651141.
Louw, A.M.; Kolar, M.K.; Novikova, L.N.; Kingham, P.J.;
Wiberg, M.; Kjems, J.; Novikov, L.N. Chitosan polyplex
mediated delivery of miRNA-124 reduces activation of mi-

Karthikeyan et al.

[187]

[188]

[189]

[190]

croglial cells in vitro and in rat models of spinal cord injury.
Nanomedicine (Lond.), 2016, 12(3), 643-653.
Laterza, O.F.; Lim, L.; Garrett-Engele, P.W.; Vlasakova,
K.; Muniappa, N.; Tanaka, W.K.; Johnson, J.M.; Sina, J.F.;
Fare, T.L.; Sistare, F.D.; Glaab, W.E. Plasma MicroRNAs
as sensitive and specific biomarkers of tissue injury. Clin.
Chem., 2009, 55(11), 1977-1983.
Ma, Q.; Dasgupta, C.; Li, Y.; Bajwa, N.M.; Xiong, F.;
Harding, B.; Hartman, R.; Zhang, L. Inhibition of microRNA-210 provides neuroprotection in hypoxic-ischemic
brain injury in neonatal rats. Neurobiol. Dis., 2016, 89, 202212.
Lee, S.T.; Jeon, D.; Chu, K.; Jung, K.H.; Moon, J.; Sunwoo,
J.; Park, D.K.; Yang, H.; Park, J-H.; Kim, M.; Roh, J.K.;
Lee, S.K. Inhibition of miR-203 reduces spontaneous recurrent seizures in mice. Mol. Neurobiol., 2016, [Epub ahead
of print].
Hu, K.; Xie, Y.Y.; Zhang, C.; Ouyang, D.S.; Long, H.Y.;
Sun, D.N.; Long, L.L.; Feng, L.; Li, Y.; Xiao, B. MicroRNA expression profile of the hippocampus in a rat
model of temporal lobe epilepsy and miR-34a-targeted neuroprotection against hippocampal neurone cell apoptosis
post-status epilepticus. BMC Neurosci., 2012, 13(1), 115.

