Pharmacological aspects
Drug treatment of Parkinson’s disease
Amos D. Korczyn, MD, MSc

P

arkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease, affecting some 30 million
patients worldwide. Like Alzheimer’s disease (AD), it
affects the elderly and causes considerable disability and
suffering. The role of dopamine (DA) as a brain neurotransmitter was discovered in the 1960s, and it was noted
that there was a loss of this substance in specific brain areas
in PD, which was linked to degenerative changes in the substantia nigra, where DA cell bodies are located.This opened
the door to the modern treatment of PD.The identification
of DA as a key neurotransmitter in the extrapyramidal system and its depletion in PD rapidly resulted in a revolution
in the treatment of PD and some related disorders.

Levodopa
The introduction of dihydroxyphenylalanine (levodopa)
to the treatment of PD was a major scientific and clinical
breakthrough in the treatment of this devastating disease.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disease. While its cause remains elusive, much progress has been
made regarding its treatment. Available drugs have a good symptomatic effect, but none has yet been shown to slow
the progression of the disease in humans. The most efficacious drug is levodopa, but it remains unclear whether the symptomatic benefit is associated with neurotoxic effects and long-term deterioration. The long-term problem associated with
levodopa is the appearance of dyskinesias, which is significantly delayed among patients treated with dopamine agonists as initial therapy. Less clear is the role of other drugs in PD, such as monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), including selegiline and rasagiline, the putative N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists amantadine and memantine, and the muscarinic receptor blockers. All these may be used as initial therapy and delay the use of dopaminergic
drugs, or can be added later to reduce specific symptoms (tremor or dyskinesias). Advanced PD is frequently associated
with cognitive decline. To some extent, this can be helped by treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors such as rivastigmine. Similarly, hallucinations and delusions affect PD patients in the advanced stages of their disease. The use of classical neuroleptic drugs in these patients is contraindicated because of their extrapyramidal effects, but atypical drugs,
and particularly clozapine, are very helpful. The big void in the therapy of PD lies in the more advanced stages. Several
motor symptoms, like postural instability, dysphagia, and dysphonia, as well as dyskinesias, are poorly controlled by existing drugs. New therapies should also be developed against autonomic symptoms, particularly constipation.
© 2004, LLS SAS

Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2004;6:315-322.

Keywords: Parkinson’s disease; treatment; levodopa; COMT inhibitor; dopamine agonist
Author affiliations: The Sieratzki Chair of Neurology, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel
Copyright © 2004 LLS SAS. All rights reserved

Address for correspondence: Amos D. Korczyn, MD, MSc, Sieratzki Chair of
Neurology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv 69978,
Israel
(e-mail: neuro13@post.tau.ac.il)

315

www.dialogues-cns.org

Pharmacological aspects
Selected abbreviations and acronyms
L-AAD
AD
COMT
DA
DAA
MAOB
PD

l-amino acid decarboxylate
Alzheimer’s disease
catechol-O-methyltransferase
dopamine
dopamine agonist
monoamine oxidase B
Parkinson’s disease

This can be considered in two aspects. First, of course, is the
enormous benefit to patients. Second, comes the realization that an understanding of biochemical deficits can provide a clue as to how replacement therapy could be successfully employed in neurodegenerative diseases,
providing significant symptomatic benefit, if not a cure.
Dopa had an enormous impact on attempts to treat
other neurodegenerative disorders, particularly AD.
Unfortunately, in spite of miraculous effects on patients
with early and advanced PD and the motor benefits
afforded to them, it soon became clear that dopa does not
slow the neurodegenerative process and its effects are
purely symptomatic. Consequently, the dopa dose required
to control the motor manifestations must be gradually
increased as the disease progresses. It quickly became clear
also that, of the two dopa isomers, only the levorotatory
stereoisomer, levodopa, produced therapeutic benefits, and
chemical means to separate the two isomers were developed. In practice, only levodopa is now used in the treatment of PD, resulting in an improved safety profile. Soon
after came the recognition that some of the adverse effects
associated with the drug were the result of peripheral—
rather than central—conversion of levodopa into DA,
which, unlike levodopa, has significant autonomic activity.1
Since DA does not cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB),
any DA produced in the peripheral nervous system does
not contribute to the clinical benefits afforded by levodopa, and actually causes significant adverse events, particularly gastrointestinal and other autonomic disturbances.
The enzyme involved in the transformation of levodopa to
DA, ie, l-amino acid decarboxylase (L-AAD, initially called
dopa decarboxylase) is widespread in the body, with high
concentrations in the liver.Two agents were developed that
could inhibit it, and both are still in use: carbidopa and
benserazide.At present, practically all patients who require
treatment with levodopa receive it as a fixed-dose combination with one of these inhibitors. Of course, it is essential
that levodopa be converted into DA in the brain, and so
the L-AAD inhibitor should not cross the BBB.

The inhibition of peripheral L-AAD has another result,
which was initially unappreciated: it prolongs the biological half-life of levodopa (and therefore also of DA in the
brain). This effect is important in advanced PD. Early on
in PD, there is a dramatic beneficial effect of levodopa,
described as the “honeymoon.” As the disease advances
and additional DA neurons are being lost, there is a need
to compensate for this by increasing the daily dose of levodopa.This is first manifested by shortening of the duration
of action of individual levodopa doses, called “end-ofdose” effect or wearing off. Later on, other manifestations
appear, including “peak of dose” dyskinesias and erratic
responses to levodopa (so-called unexpected “on-off,” or
yo-yoing) (Table I). While the exact mechanism responsible for this erratic response is still elusive, it is at least
partly dependent upon pharmacokinetic factors such as
plasma levels of levodopa. In particular, the phenomenon
of wearing off, where the initial prolonged response to
individual doses of levodopa is no longer maintained,2 limits the patients’ independence. Wearing off probably
results from impaired capacity of the nigrostriatal DA neurons and their terminals to uptake, store, and release DA.
This problem becomes more severe as more and more terParkinson’s disease
Adult-onset, progressive, predominantly motor disorder
Combining 2 or more of the following:
• Resting tremor
• Bradykinesia
• Limb rigidity
• Gait instability (late)
Dramatic response to levodopa
Accepted associated phenomena:
• Depression (early or late)
• Cognitive decline (early or late)
• Autonomic dysfunction (mainly constipation)
Advanced Parkinson’s disease
Chronic progressive disease
With deterioration of:
• Gait and balance
• Motor manifestations
• Nonmotor problems (eg, dementia, autonomic dysfunction)
Variable response to therapy:
• Fluctuations and/or drug-induced complications
• Short duration response: delayed or partial “on,”
wearing off, dyskinesias
Table I. Clinical definition of Parkinson’s disease and advanced Parkinson’s
disease.

316

Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 6 . No. 3 . 2004

Drug treatment of Parkinson’s disease - Korczyn

minals degenerate.3 Blockade of peripheral L-AAD, which
prolongs the biological half-life of the drug, can only
incompletely compensate for this.
Levodopa remains the “gold standard” of PD therapy. It
is the most potent antiparkinsonian drug available.4
However, several key symptoms of PD fail to respond to
levodopa, or have a limited or unsatisfactory response
(Table II). As discussed above, the long-term use of levodopa often leads to complications later in the disease;
wearing-off, dyskinesias, freezing episodes, and unpredictable “on-off” fluctuations are the most problematic.5
The pathogenesis and pathophysiology of these complications remain unclear, but it has been suggested that
they are related to the toxicity of levodopa or its metabolites. The pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
changes that take place as the disease progresses may be
major contributors. It has also been speculated that the
complications may derive, at least in part, from the toxic
effects of levodopa or DA oxidative metabolites.
Since levodopa alleviates the symptoms of the disease,
accurate assessment of the patient’s real condition and
monitoring of disease progression are problematic. At
present, the only way to assess progression or deterioration is by withdrawing levodopa for a period exceeding
2 weeks. Obviously, this is not a practical solution particularly in the advanced stages of the disease and therefore
our ability to monitor the rate of disease progression is
limited. Biological surrogate markers are constantly
being sought. Positron emission tomography (PET) and
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
techniques are being developed and have shown significant correlations with global severity of PD.6

for COMT inhibition is as an adjunctive therapy to levodopa in advanced PD patients who have developed
wearing off or “on-off” fluctuations.7,8 However, COMT
treatment in the earlier stages of PD may also be worthwhile by preventing or delaying motor complications.
COMT inhibition as a new treatment strategy for PD has
been recently comprehensively reviewed.9,10
Two COMT inhibitors have been widely tested so far:
tolcapone and entacapone. Although motor fluctuations
such as “off” periods are frequently reduced or eliminated by the use of tolcapone or entacapone, peak dose
dyskinesias can be enhanced or precipitated, requiring a
reduction in individual doses of levodopa. Both drugs
were shown to improve the patients’ quality of life.
Tolcapone was recently removed from the market in
most countries due to presumed hepatic toxicity.
However, the exact relationship to drug exposure is still
ambiguous. On the basis of the rarity of these adverse
events, some practitioners believe that its withdrawal was
premature, arguing that the drug is possibly superior to
entacapone (although a direct comparison between the
two has not been performed).
Entacapone has a brief duration of action of approximately 2 h, ie, it has to be consumed with each levodopa
dose (or even more frequently). Preparations containing
levodopa, entacapone, and a decarboxylase inhibitor in
a single tablet or capsule could be beneficial, especially
for patients who are treated with other drugs as well.
Long-acting derivatives or sustained-release formulations
of entacapone could also be advantageous.

COMT inhibitors

DA agonists (DAAs) have been an important tool in the
treatment of PD for almost 40 years.11 The first study of
DAAs by Calne et al12 constituted a milestone in PD therapy. These drugs were introduced shortly after the discovery of levodopa and were initially thought to represent second- or even third-line agents. This was because
they were effective in patients who had developed intolerance to—or side effects of—levodopa. Their initial use
demonstrated not only their efficacy against rigidity and
tremor, but also their dopa-sparing effects. The possibility
of reducing the dose of levodopa gradually became more
important as the complications of chronic levodopa therapy were recognized, particularly dyskinesias and motor
fluctuations. The ability to replace some of the levodopa dose with a DAA resulted in amelioration of these

Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) is a ubiquitous
enzyme that breaks down levodopa before it can be converted to DA, as well as DA itself. COMT inhibitors prolong the availability of a single dose of levodopa, without
delaying the onset of its effects, frequently reducing the
total amount of levodopa needed. The present indication
Posture and gait problems, speech problems, freezing
Autonomic dysfunction
Cognitive disorders
Affective disorders
Sleep problems
Table II. Symptoms unresponsive to levodopa.

DA agonists

317

Pharmacological aspects
motor disturbances, also proving that they are not necessarily an unavoidable development in chronic PD.
Attempts to use a DAA as monotherapy in advanced
cases of PD were deserted due to poor efficacy and the
existence of side effects, while the trend toward using a
DAA as early therapy increased: by delaying the initiation of levodopa treatment, motor complications can be
prevented. Several novel DAAs were tested and their
utility was unquestionably demonstrated, although these
studies proved that DAAs are less efficacious than levodopa (with the notable exception of apomorphine). This
may not be very important in the initial stages of PD.
However, as the disease progresses, stronger DA stimulation is required and, as increased DAA dosages become
limited by side effects, supplementation with levodopa becomes necessary, albeit again with the danger of
the development of motor complications.13,14
Although there is no doubt that DAAs can be used initially as monotherapy, the number of patients in whom
this treatment can be maintained over long periods
remains unclear. According to available data, levodopa
will be added over 3 years in about 20% of patients, and
in 50% after 5 years.15
While the ergot derivatives are clearly efficacious in PD,
their use has been complicated by several side effects. It
was realized that ergots are “dirty” drugs, with the potential to interact with several types of receptors in the central nervous system, as well as in the periphery. The
development of the synthetic DAAs piribedil, ropinirole,
and pramipexole was an important further step.
However, these agents shared a number of side effects. It
thus became clear that, while pleuropulmonary fibrosis
may be specific to ergot derivatives, most of the complications of these therapies are class effects. Cardiac valve
changes were recently ascribed to pergolide.16,17
The motor fluctuations that characterize prolonged levodopa therapy are thought (but not proven) to be related
to the short plasma half-lives of individual levodopa
doses (t1/2=90 min). The clinical benefit from individual
doses is longer, at least in early stages of the disease, due
to the buffering capacity of surviving DA neurons, which
transform levodopa to DA, store it, and then release it in
a tonic, rather than phasic, pattern. The fact that DAAs
do not depend on DA neurons is a theoretical advantage,
particularly at advanced stages of the disease when very
few DA neurons survive. However, this advantage is
related to their longer duration of action, typically 4 to 6
hours (and much longer for cabergoline). If the nonsus-

tained level of DA stimulation is responsible for the
development of motor fluctuations, these complications
should be significantly delayed if cabergoline is to be
used in de novo cases.
Several studies have suggested that DAAs have additional beneficial properties, such as antioxidant or antiapoptotic effects.12 Notably, all these studies were performed in vitro, and therefore had a very short duration
and used doses with unclear relationship to the clinical
situation. There are no available data indicating that
DAAs have relevant antioxidant or antiapoptotic effects
in routine clinical use in humans, or indeed that oxidative
stress plays a major role in the pathogenesis of PD. The
early addition of a DAA prevents (or at least delays) the
appearance of motor complications, but whether this
should be regarded as a neuroprotective effect is questionable. Furthermore, even if DAA can slow the progressive loss of DA neurons in the substantia nigra, it
would be very difficult to prove it.
If DAAs do slow the progression of PD, a possible mechanism could be stimulation of presynaptic DA receptors.
Probably all DA terminals contain receptors that mediate the synthesis and release of DA by negative feedback. Endogenous DA can be metabolized to produce
toxic reactive oxygen species. Reduction in the rate of
DA synthesis can thus be expected to slow the ongoing
damage to DA neurons. Most (and probably all) DAAs
reduce the rate DA of synthesis, but there is limited information on their relative efficacy in this regard.
Theoretically, a drug with relatively strong presynaptic
stimulation (relative to postsynaptic D2 stimulation), such
as talipexole, should be preferred, although it is difficult
to see how that advantage can be demonstrated in PD
patients.
Currently used DAAs include the “ergot-derived” or
“ergoline” drugs bromocriptine, cabergoline, lisuride, and
pergolide, with chemical structures based on ergot, a
plant alkaloid. The newer, “non-ergot” synthetic DAA,
piribedil, pramipexole, and ropinirole—chemically unrelated to ergot—are being promoted vigorously.
Side effects typical of all DAAs (as well as levodopa)
include nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and orthostatic
hypotension.11,15,18-20 At higher doses, DAAs may induce
confusion, hallucinations, and psychosis, although these
usually appear in the advanced stages of the disease.21
Sedation and insomnia are other reported side effects of
some DAAs, as well as of levodopa, and are probably not
associated with any specific agonist.

318

Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 6 . No. 3 . 2004

Drug treatment of Parkinson’s disease - Korczyn

Attention has recently been drawn to somnolence as a
possible adverse effect of DAAs (including levodopa).
Events of a compelling urge to sleep (so-called “sleep
attacks”) have been observed in patients treated with
DAAs.22-26 This is a serious side effect that may cause driving accidents. This needs to be considered and explained
to the patient, particularly if he or she is involved in activity in which the somnolence, even if not excessive, could
endanger them or others.
Some of the side effects specifically linked to the ergot
derivatives include digital or coronary vasospasm, as well
as pleuropulmonary and retroperitoneal fibrosis. These
are not associated with the newer and safer non-ergot
DAAs piribedil, ropinirole, and pramipexole.27
A transdermal formulation of the experimental D2 selective agonist rotigotine is currently in development.28 It
has been found to reduce daily levodopa doses by 30%
in a multicenter phase 2b trial in mild-to-severe PD.
Apomorphine is the most potent DAA, and the only one
that stimulates effectively both DA D1 and D2 receptors
(as does DA itself). However, its therapeutic effect is hampered by its complex interindividual pharmaco-kinetics and
pharmacodynamic variability and its narrow therapeutic
range. Apomorphine cannot be used as an oral drug, but
subcutaneous injections are very helpful, particularly for
patients with prolonged “off” episodes. Continuous delivery of apomorphine subcutaneously through a pump is
available, but is technically complex to use and expensive.29
In order to overcome these difficulties, several attempts to
create individualized controlled delivery systems for apomorphine are being explored, eg, transdermal iontophoresis and sublingual delivery of the drug. This will be particularly useful for a rapid effect to control fluctuations.30 In a
recent study, a carboxymethyl cellulose powder of apomorphine was tested as intranasal sustained-release formulation. These newer delivery systems will hopefully
enhance its use as a rescue medication in severe cases.30
There are at least five types of DA receptors, namely D1,
D2, D3, D4, and D5. The role of D1 stimulation in the therapy of movement disorders, and particularly PD, has
been debated for years. Bromocriptine is a D1 antagonist,
pergolide a D1 agonist, while ropinirole and pramipexole
do not interact with D1 receptors at all. Since all these
DAAs have similar efficacy in PD, the role of D1 receptors in PD therapy is questionable. However recent
reports suggest that the specific D1-stimulating drug,
ABT-431, is also effective in PD.31 Thus, there are several
remaining issues in DAA therapy (Table III).

Other drugs
The efficacy of selegiline in the treatment of PD is based
on the assumption that inhibition of the monoamine oxidase B (MAOB) enzyme may prevent DA neurotoxicity.32,33 The extensive DATATOP (Deprenyl And Tocopherol Antioxidative Therapy Of Parkinsonism) study
demonstrated the safety and beneficial symptomatic
effects of selegiline in early PD, but not necessarily its
neuroprotective effect.34 It is possible that at higher therapeutic doses, MAOB inhibitors will not only ameliorate
disease symptoms, but could also provide neuroprotection, which has been demonstrated in vitro with equivalent drug concentrations. Several MAOB inhibitors are
at various stages of development. A new formulation of
selegiline dissolves instantly in the mouth, eliminating the
first-pass effect in the liver, so that therapeutic levels are
reached at an eighth of the daily regular dose of selegiline. This reduces the concentrations of amphetamine, the
unwanted metabolite of selegiline, which otherwise limits the maximal tolerated dose.
Rasagiline, another MAOB inhibitor, is presently being
evaluated in clinical trials in the USA, Europe, and Israel.
At doses up to 2 mg/day, rasagiline shows good safety
and tolerability.32 It has a similar pharmacological profile
to selegiline, but without amphetamine as a metabolite.
Amantadine has been used for the treatment of PD for
several decades, even though its mechanism of action is
obscure.35,36 Recently, it was shown to function by inhibiting N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and found
to be effective in reducing dyskinesias.37,38 Memantine, a
related drug, also functions as a neuroprotective agent
through this mechanism. Memantine is used in Germany
as an antispastic drug and also to treat dementia, and is
presently being evaluated for its effectiveness in PD, on
the basis of preliminary results.39 The antiglutamatergic
Functional significance of dopamine receptor subtypes
D1, D2, D3, D4, and D5
Neuroprotection by DAA: does it exist? (If yes, what are the
mechanisms?)
Possible advantages and complications of long-term DAA
monotherapy.
Is the prevention of dyskinesias afforded by DAAs due to their
long half-life, or is it related to pharmacodynamic factors?
What is the mechanism responsible for tolerance to the
peripheral side effects of DAAs?
Table III. Remaining issues in dopamine agonist (DAA) therapy.

319

Pharmacological aspects
effect of amantadine and memantine also suggests a neuroprotective action, and memantine is now actively promoted in AD.

Treatment of nonparkinsonian symptoms
Although motor symptoms are the cardinal features of
PD, most if not all patients will also manifest symptoms
in other spheres. Depression is particularly common and
frequently antedates the motor disorder.40 Clinical experience shows that tricyclic antidepressants and selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors are very efficacious in this
condition, with a dose and adverse event profile similar
to that of other patients. Amitriptyline, which has a
marked antimuscarinic action, may adversely affect the
constipation, while reducing the severity of parkinsonian
tremor.
Cognitive deterioration in PD may start even before
motor symptoms appear (and is then trendily termed
“dementia with Lewy bodies”), but more frequently
characterizes the advanced stages of the disease. The
underlying mechanism probably relates to cholinergic
loss41 and is thus similar to AD. It is therefore not surprising that treatment with acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors is effective in demented patients with PD.42
Interestingly, the motor manifestations are not made
worse. Although data are still meager, they seem to favor
rivastigmine over donepezil.
Delusions and hallucinations, usually visual, are frequent
in advanced PD, particularly in demented patients.
Obviously, classical neuroleptics cannot be used since by
blocking DA receptors the parkinsonian symptoms would
be exacerbated. The new generation of antipsychotics
offers an important advance. Clozapine in particular is

REFERENCES
1. Korczyn AD. Parkinson’s disease. In: Davis KL, ed. Psychopharmacology: The
Fourth Generation of Progress. New York, NY: Raven Press; 1994:1479-1485.
2. Agid Y, Ahlskog E, Albanese A, et al. Levodopa in the treatment of
Parkinson’s disease: a consensus meeting. Mov Disord. 1999;14:911-913.
3. Korczyn AD. Pathophysiology of drug-induced dyskinesias. Neuropharmacology. 1973;11:601-607.
4. Stern MB. The early treatment of Parkinson’s disease: levodopa, DA agonists or both. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2001;7:27-33.
5. Marsden CD, Parkes JD. “On-off” effects in patients with Parkinson's disease on chronic levodopa therapy. Lancet. 1976;1:292-296.
6. Brooks DJ. Advances in imaging Parkinson’s disease. Curr Opin Neurol.
1997;10:327-331.

helpful in this situation, though its side effects and particularly the need for hematological monitoring are disadvantageous.43 Quetiapine may be as useful,44 but other socalled “atypical neuroleptics,” and particularly olanzapine,
are quite likely to induce motor exacerbation.
The autonomic dysfunction in PD is another frequently
problematic area. The most significant of all is constipation, which commonly antedates the diagnosis and is frequently exacerbated by the antiparkinsonian drugs.43
Clinical experience again suggests that the usual therapies
(eg, sildenafil for penile erectile dysfunction) are useful.

Conclusion
The management of PD is quite easy at the initial stages
of the disease, where all dopaminomimetic drugs, as well
as amantadine or selegiline (or an antimuscarinic agent
if tremor is the main problem), can be very efficacious.
As the disease advances, however, the motor complications become increasingly more severe and difficult to
control, and require expertise and individual tailoring. At
this stage, it is sometimes necessary to resort to functional
neurosurgery.
Unfortunately, no drugs are yet available that slow the
rate of progression of PD. The initial therapy for the
motor symptoms should constitute a DAA, which all
have similar efficacy, though non-ergot DAAs are probably safer. As the disease progresses and these agents
become insufficient, levodopa can be added. There is no
clear role for selegiline and amantadine. In spite of the
fact that these drugs are definitely effective and relatively
safe, their efficacy is lower than that of the previously
mentioned drugs. Several new modalities are presently
under investigation. ❏

7. Rajput AH, Martin W, Saint Hilaire MH, et al. Tolcapone improves motor
function in parkinsonian patients with the “wearing off” phenomenon: a double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter trial. Neurology. 1997;49:1066-1071.
8. Brooks DJ, Sagar H; UK-Irish Entacapone Study Group. Entacapone is beneficial in both fluctuating and non-fluctuating patients with Parkinson’s disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, six-month study. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74:1071-1079.
9. Korczyn AD. COMT inhibitors in Parkinson’s disease. In: Factor SA, Weiner
WJ, eds. Parkinson's Disease. New York, NY: Demos; 2002:379-397.
10. Olanow CW, Stucchi F. COMT inhibitors in Parkinson’s disease: can they
prevent and/or reverse levodopa-induced motor complications? Neurology.
2004;62:S74-S82.
11. Rascol O, Goetz C, Koller W, Poewe W, Sampaio C. Treatment interventions for Parkinson’s disease: an evidence based assessment. Lancet.
2002;359:1589-1598.

320

Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 6 . No. 3 . 2004

Drug treatment of Parkinson’s disease - Korczyn

Tratamiento farmacológico de la enfermedad
de Parkinson

Traitement médicamenteux de la maladie de
Parkinson

La enfermedad de Parkinson (EP) es una enfermedad neurodegenerativa frecuente. A pesar de que
su causa permanece sin aclararse, se ha realizado
bastante progreso en su tratamiento. Los fármacos
disponibles tienen un buen efecto sintomático,
pero ninguno de ellos ha demostrado que pueda
retrasar la progresión de la enfermedad en el ser
humano. El fármaco más eficaz es la levodopa, pero
aun no se aclara si el beneficio sintomático está asociado con los efectos neurotóxicos y el deterioro a
largo plazo. El problema a largo plazo asociado con
la levodopa es la aparición de disquinesias, la cual
está significativamente retardada en los pacientes
que reciben agonistas dopaminérgicos como terapia inicial. El papel de otros fármacos en la EP
parece menos claro, como ocurre con los inhibidores de la monoamino-oxidasa (IMAOs) que incluyen
la selegilina y la rasagilina, los antagonistas del
receptor putativo de N-metil-D-aspartato (NMDA)
amantadina y memantina, y los bloqueadores del
receptor muscarínico. Todos estos fármacos pueden
utilizarse como terapia inicial y retardar el empleo
de fármacos dopaminérgicos, o se pueden adicionar más adelante para reducir síntomas específicos
como el temblor o las disquinesias. La EP avanzada
se asocia frecuentemente con una declinación cognitiva. En parte esta declinación se puede tratar con
inhibidores de la colinesterasa como la rivastigmina.
Del mismo modo, las alucinaciones y los delirios
afectan a los pacientes con EP en estados avanzados de la enfermedad. El empleo de neurolépticos
clásicos en estos pacientes está contraindicado
debido a sus efectos extrapiramidales, pero los neurolépticos atípicos, y especialmente la clozapina,
resultan muy útiles. El gran vacío en el tratamiento
de la EP radica en las etapas más avanzadas.
Algunos síntomas motores, como la inestabilidad
postural, la disfagia y la disfonía, como también las
disquinesias son escasamente controlados por los
fármacos existentes. Se deben desarrollar nuevos
tratamientos contra síntomas autonómicos, especialmente la constipación.

La maladie de Parkinson (MP) est une maladie neurodégénérative fréquente. Alors que sa cause reste
difficile à trouver, beaucoup de progrès ont été faits
en ce qui concerne son traitement. Les médicaments disponibles agissent bien sur les symptômes,
mais aucun n’a encore montré qu’il ralentissait la
progression de la maladie chez l’homme. Le médicament le plus efficace est la lévodopa, mais l’on se
demande si l’effet favorable sur les symptômes
n’est pas associé à des effets neurotoxiques et une
détérioration à long terme. Le problème à long
terme de la lévodopa est la survenue de dyskinésies,
qui est significativement retardée chez les patients
recevant des agonistes dopaminergiques comme
traitement initial. Le rôle d’autres médicaments
dans la MP, tels que les inhibiteurs de la monoamine-oxydase (IMAO), dont la sélégiline et la rasagiline, les présumés antagonistes du récepteur Nméthyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), l’amantadine et la
mémantine, et les agents bloquant le récepteur
muscarinique, est moins clair. Tous peuvent être utilisés en première intention et retardent l’utilisation
des médicaments dopaminergiques, ou peuvent
être associés plus tard afin de diminuer des symptômes spécifiques (tremblement ou dyskinésies). La
MP évoluée est fréquemment associée à un déclin
cognitif. Les anticholinestérasiques comme la rivastigmine peuvent l’empêcher, jusqu’à un certain
point. De la même façon, les hallucinations et
délires concernent les patients parkinsoniens aux
stades évolués de leur maladie. L’utilisation de neuroleptiques classiques chez ces patients est contreindiquée à cause de leurs effets extrapyramidaux,
mais des médicaments atypiques, et en particulier
la clozapine, sont très utiles. Le grand vide dans le
traitement de la MP se situe aux stades les plus évolués. Plusieurs symptômes moteurs, comme l’instabilité posturale, la dysphagie, la dysphonie, ainsi
que les dyskinésies, sont mal contrôlés par les médicaments existants. De nouveaux médicaments
devraient aussi être développés contre les symptômes liés au système nerveux autonome, en particulier la constipation.

321

Pharmacological aspects
12. Calne DB, Teychenne PF, Claveria LE, Eastman R, Greenacre JK, Petrie A.
Bromocriptine in parkinsonism. BMJ. 1974;4:442-444.
13. Montastruc JL. Rascol O, Rascol A. A randomized controlled study of
bromocriptine versus levodopa in previously untreated Parkinsonian
patients: a 3-year follow-up. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1989;52:773-775.
14. Rinne UK. Problems associated with long-term levodopa treatment of
Parkinson’s disease. Acta Neurol Scand. 1983;95:19-26.
15. Rascol O, Brooks DJ, Korczyn AD, et al. A 5-year study of the incidence
of dyskinesias in patients with early Parkinson’s disease who were treated
with ropinirole or levodopa. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:1484-1491.
16. Ling LH, Ahlskog JE, Munger TM, et al. Constrictive pericarditis and pleuropulmonary disease linked to ergot dopamine agonist therapy (cabergoline) for Parkinson’s disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 1999;74:371-375.
17. Van Camp G, Flamez A, Cosyns B, et al. Treatment of Parkinson’s disease
with pergolide and relation to restrictive valvular heart disease. Lancet.
2004;363:1179-1183.
18. Korczyn AD, Brunt ER, Larsden JR, et al. A 3-year randomized trial of
ropinirole and bromocriptine in early Parkinson's disease. Neurology.
1999;53:364-370.
19. Jenner P. The rationale for the use of dopamine agonists in Parkinson’s
disease. Neurology. 1995;45:S6-S12.
20. Lange KW. Clinical pharmacology of dopamine agonists in Parkinson’s
disease. Drugs Aging. 1998;13:381-389.
21. Korczyn AD. Hallucinations in Parkinson’s disease. Lancet. 2001;358:1031-1032.
22. Olanow CW, Schapira AHV, Roth T. Waking up to sleep episodes in
Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord Soc. 2000;15:212-215.
23. Schapira AH. Sleep attacks (sleep episodes) with pergolide. Lancet.
2000;355:1332-1333.
24. Pal S, Bhattacharya KF, Agapito C, et al. A study of excessive daytime
sleepiness and its clinical significance in three groups of Parkinson’s disease
patients taking pramipexole, cabergoline and levodopa mono and combination therapy. J Neural Transm. 2001;108:71-77.
25. Frucht S, Rogers JD, Greene PE, et al. Falling asleep at the wheel: motor
vehicle mishaps in persons taking pramipexole and ropinirole. Neurology.
1999;52:1908-1910.
26. Ferreira JJ, Thalamas C, Montastruc JL, et al. Levodopa monotherapy
can induce “sleep attacks” in Parkinson’s disease patients. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 2001;248:426-427.
27. Lund BC, Neiman RF, Perry PJ. Treatment of Parkinson’s disease with
ropinirole after pergolide-induced retroperitoneal fibrosis. Pharmacotherapy.
1999;19:1437-1438.
28. Roberts JW, Mouradian M, Ho Sohn Y, et al. D2 agonist N-0923 in the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology. 1994;44:244.
29. Gancher ST, Nutt JG, Woodward WR. Apomorphine infusional therapy
in Parkinson’s disease: clinical utility and lack of tolerance. Mov Disord Soc.
1995;10:37-43.
30. Ondo W, Hunter C, Almaguer M, et al. A novel sublingual apomorphine
treatment for patients with fluctuating Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord.
1999;14:664-668.

31. Rascol O, Blin O, Thalamas C, et al. ABT-431, a D1 receptor agonist prodrug, has efficacy in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol. 1999;45:736-741.
32. Finberg JP, Wang J, Bankiewicz K, et al. Increased striatal production
from L-DOPA following selective inhibition of monoamine oxidase B by
R(+)-N-propargyl-1-aminoindan (rasagiline) in the monkey. J Neural Transm.
1998;52:279-285.
33. Cohen G, Spina MB. Deprenyl suppresses the oxidant stress associated
with increased dopamine turnover. Ann Neurol. 1989;26:689-690.
34. Parkinson’s Disease Study Group. Effects of tocopherol and deprenyl on
the progression of disability in early Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med.
1993;178:125-183.
35. Eshel Y, Korczyn AD. Amantadine antagonism of oxotremorine effects.
J Neural Transm. 1979;46:79-83.
36. Korczyn AD, Keren O, Eshel Y. Effect of amantadine on pupillary diameter in mice. Israel J Med Sci. 1982;18:145-147.
37. Factor SA, Molho ES. Transient benefit of amantadine in Parkinson’s disease: the facts about the myth. Mov Disord. 1999;14:515-516.
38. Verhagen Metaman L, Del Dotto P, van den Munckhof P, et al.
Amantadine as treatment for dyskinesias and motor fluctuations in
Parkinson’s disease. Neurology. 1998;50:1323-1326.
39. Rabey JM, Korczyn AD. Efficacy of memantine, and NMDA receptor
antagonist in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. J Neural Transm.
1992;4:277-282.
40. Treves TA, Paleacu D, Rabey JM, Korczyn AD. Depression inventories in
Parkinson’s disease. In: Przuntek H, Kraus PH, Klotz P, Korczyn AD, eds.
Instrumental Methods and Scoring in Extrapyramidal Disorders. Vienna, Austria:
Springer; 1995;31-43.
41. Bohnen NI, Kaufer DI, Ivanco LS, et al. Cortical cholinergic function is
more severely affected in parkinsonian dementia than in Alzheimer disease:
an in vivo positron emission tomographic study. Arch Neurol. 2003;60:17451748.
42. Giladi N, Shabtai H, Gurevich T, Benbunan B, Anca M, Korczyn AD.
Rivastigmine (Exelon) for dementia in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Acta
Neurol Scand. 2003;108:368-373.
43. Rabey JM, Treves TA, Neufeld MY, Orlov E, Korczyn AD. Low-dose clozapine in the treatment of levodopa induced mental disturbances in
Parkinson’s disease. Neurology. 1995;45:432-434.
44. Fernandez HH, Friedman JH, Jacques C, Rosenfeld M. Quetiapine for the
treatment of drug-induced psychosis in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord.
1999;14:484-487.
45. Korczyn AD. Dopaminergic drugs in development for Parkinson’s disease. In: Gordin A, Kaakkola S, Teravainen H, eds. Advances in Neurology, 91.
Parkinson’s Disease. Philadelphia, Pa: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2003;267271.
46. Korczyn AD. Autonomic nervous system disturbances in Parkinson’s disease. In: Streifler MB, Korczyn AD, Melamed E, Youdim MBH, ed. Advances
in Neurology: Parkinson’s Disease: Anatomy, Pathology, Therapy. New York, NY:
Raven Press; 1990:463-468.

322

