Movement Disorders
Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007, pp. S327-S334
© 2007 Movement Disorder Society

Unresolved Issues Relating to the Shaking Palsy on the
Celebration of James Parkinson’s 250th Birthday
Andrew J. Lees, MD, FRCP
Reta Lila Weston Institute for Neurological Disorders, Institute of Neurology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom

Abstract: James Parkinson’s Essay on the Shaking Palsy
published in 1817 provided the ﬁrst clear clinical description
for the disorder now known throughout the world by his name.
His primary reason for publishing his monograph shortly before his retirement from medical practice was to draw the
medical profession’s attention to a malady, which had not yet
been deﬁned as a nosological entity. He also hoped that the
eminent anatomists of the day would be stimulated to elucidate
the pathological lesion responsible for the clinical picture and
that this in turn might lead to a rational cure. The concept of
Parkinson’s disease remains clinically based and successive
generations of neurologists have reﬁned and embellished Parkinson’s seminal descriptions. Narrative accounts by affected
individuals have also helped physicians understand what it is
like to live with Parkinson’s disease. For many years, the
pathological hallmarks of Parkinson’s disease were disputed
and there were few clinico-pathological reports with adequate
clinical description. However, most neurologists now link severe loss of nigral cells in the ventrolateral tier of the pars
compacta of the substantia nigra with bradykinesia and the
presence of Lewy bodies in a number of discrete brain stem and
cortical regions with Parkinson’s disease. There are many unanswered clinical questions relating to Parkinson’s disease including the striking heterogeneity and frequent limb asymme-

try. It also remains somewhat uncertain whether Parkinson’s
disease is ever truly unilateral by the time of clinical presentation and whether the hand rather than the foot is the most
common site of onset. Hyposmia and visual hallucinations are
helpful pointers in distinguishing Parkinson’s disease from
atypical Parkinsonism and should be speciﬁcally enquired
about in the history. Simple reliable cultural-speciﬁc smell
identiﬁcation batteries are an urgent need and target of clinical
research. It remains to be determined whether Alzheimer type
dementia as opposed to a dysexecutive syndrome should be
considered a part of Parkinson’s disease and further detailed
clinico-pathological correlative studies are needed. It is also
unclear whether autosomal dominant monogenetic Parkinsonism due to synuclein or LRRK-2 mutations will prove to be
identical clinically with Parkinson’s disease and for the present
it is wiser to regard Parkinson’s disease as a sporadic disorder.
Parkinson was an active political reformer and if alive today
would certainly be campaigning to translate more effectively
the rich seam of neuroscientiﬁc research of the last decade into
therapeutic beneﬁts for the rising number of people who are
developing the shaking palsy as a result of increasing longevity
in the developed world. © 2007 Movement Disorder Society
Key words: James Parkinson; clinical features; Parkinson’s
disease; substantia nigra; neuropathology.

In 1911, James Parkinson’s ﬁrst biographer Leonard G
Rowntree addressed the Johns Hopkins Hospital Historical Society as follows “English born, English bred,
forgotten by the English and the world at large such was
the fate of James Parkinson.”1 Two hundred and ﬁfty
years after Parkinson’s birth this can no longer be said to

be the case. The disease, which thanks to Charcot, now
carries the Hoxton apothecary’s name, is increasingly
recognized throughout the world and his birthday April
11 has become World Parkinson’s Day, symbolized by
the James Parkinson tulip. In 1817 Parkinson published a
slim monograph entitled “An Essay on the Shaking
Palsy” based on the clinical description of 6 patients he
had seen either as patients, or on his peregrinations
through the streets close to his home in Hoxton Square.
He was already in his sixty second year and starting to
wind down his medical work, leaving more and more of
the duties of his busy general practice to his son, thus
allowing himself more time to devote to his passion for

Correspondence to: A.J. Lees, Reta Lila Weston Institute for Neurological Disorders, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United Kingdom. E-mail: alees@ion.ucl.ac.uk
Received 19 April 2007; Accepted 2 July 2007
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.
com). DOI: 10.1002/mds.21684

S327

S328

A.J. LEES

paleontology. However, he felt that the complex of
symptoms so eloquently recorded in his essay had not yet
obtained a place in the classiﬁcation of nosologists and
were therefore worthy of putting on record. He also
hoped that their publication would stimulate the anatomists and eminent physicians of the day to search for the
site of the pathological lesion within the brain.2 James
would have been embarrassed to have the label “maladie
de Parkinson” bestowed on his labors by Charcot, the
father of neurology, in 1877 and if still alive might well
have defended the continuing usage of the ancient term
of “shaking palsy.” His modesty and decency are reﬂected by the fact that, although, during his life he was
held in respect in both medical and geological circles, no
portrait has as yet come to light. Parkinson also chose to
write his critical and often acerbic polemical pamphlets
under the nom de plume of Old Hubert, although this
may have been more to preserve his anonymity in turbulent times.
His treatise on the shaking palsy begins with the
succinct summary of the distinctive features of the malady. “Involuntary tremulous motion with lessened muscular power, in parts not in action and even when supported: with a propensity to bend the trunk forwards and
to pass from a walking to a running pace: the senses and
intellect being uninjured.”
He graciously and studiously acknowledged the earlier
descriptions by Galen, Gaubius, Juncker, Cullen, Boissier de Sauvages and Sylvius de la Boe and speculated
that trauma to the top of the cervical cord might be a
possible cause.2 There has been much interest and speculation as to why James Parkinson might have been
particularly drawn to describe the shaking palsy; his
medical writings were wide ranging and pragmatic as
beﬁts a busy general practitioner and drew directly on the
experiences of his clinical practice. He was also a liberal
social reformer who railed against the dreadful public
health issues and the treatment of the insane. He attended
the inspirational lectures of the eminent anatomist and
surgeon John Hunter at the Leicester Square Lyceum and
at the London Hospital, and Parkinson’s son John transcribed his father’s shorthand notes into a book entitled
“Hunterian Reminiscences” published after his father’s
death in 1833. It is intriguing that an important omission
from James Parkinson’s historical bibliography was the
description by Hunter in his Croonian Lecture: “Lord
L-’s hands are perpetually in motion, and he never feels
the sensation of them being tired. When he is asleep his
hands are perfectly at rest but when he wakes in a little
time they begin to move.” It is probable this description
had escaped Parkinson’s attention, but perhaps Hunter
had mentioned Lord L at one of his demonstrations,

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

which had subliminally sensitized Parkinson’s lively
mind to the disorder. There is no evidence to support that
he or any of his family were afﬂicted with the malady
and his own justiﬁcation for his monograph was simply
that the disorder had so far escaped notice in much the
same way as some of the fossils he and his friends in the
Geological Society were recording for the ﬁrst time.3
Subsequent generations of physicians have searched
for additional descriptions of Parkinson’s disease, but
while fragmentary accounts have come to light in biblical texts, the Ayurvedic and among the hieroglyphics of
the Great Pyramids, none are as satisfying or complete as
that provided by Parkinson.47 For example, there is an
Egyptian papyrus of the nineteenth dynasty (ca. 1350 –
1200 BC), which describes a king as follows “divine old
age had slackened his mouth. He cast his spittle upon the
ground and spit it out”—a possible early reference to
Parkinsonian drooling. In the Hindu library of the University of Benares among the Sanskrit texts is the Charakasamhita compiled around 2500 BC by Agnivesha;
Chapter 20, entitled Vepathu contains a comprehensive
account of tremors, some of which are linked with one of
the Vatas or palsies.3 In Ecclesiastes 12:3 a description
can be found of the fate of the young as they inevitably
age “In the day when the keepers of the house shall
tremble.” Leonardo da Vinci had a great interest in the
workings of the nervous system and on a page of anatomical drawing in the collection of the Queen of England at Windsor Castle the following explanation of
involuntary movements is included4 “how nerves sometimes operate by themselves without any command from
other functioning parts or the soul. This is clearly apparent for you will see paralytics and those who are shivering and benumbed by cold move their trembling parts,
such as their head or hands without permission of the
soul; which soul with all its forces cannot prevent these
parts from trembling.”
In 1776 Johannes Baptiste Sagar in his treatise “An
Ariadne’s Thread for Students of the Sick” included the
following commentary: “In Vienna, I saw a man above
the age of 50 who was running involuntarily, being also
unable of keeping direction so as to avoid obstacles; in
addition he suffered from ptyalism.”5 These tantalizing
but ultimately unsatisfying descriptions are worth recording if only to support Parkinson’s contention that he
was not describing a newly emerging disease caused by
industrialization. What also sets Parkinson’s monograph
apart from these interesting “snap shots” is his attempt to
describe the natural history of the malady—“The disease
is of long duration: to connect, therefore, the symptoms
which occur in its later stages with those which mark its
commencement, requires a continuance of observation of

ISSUES RELATING TO THE SHAKING PALSY
the same case, or at least a correct history of its symptoms, even for several years.”2
It is a favorite pastime and preoccupation of neurologists to discern neurological disease concealed in the
paintings of the Old Masters. Because the cardinal features of Parkinson’s disease include a poverty and slowness of voluntary movement and a pill rolling resting
tremor, absolute diagnostic certainty can never be
achieved from inspection of a canvas or from a photograph, whereas cinematographic evidence has provided
convincing footage supporting a diagnosis of Parkinsonism in Adolf Hitler, General Franco, and Chairman Mao
Tse Tung. What may be discerned in a still picture,
however, is the characteristic ﬂexion of the trunk, neck,
elbow, and knees suggesting a weary “hang dog” body
language. The physiognomy may suggest a mixture of
mild anxiety with staring eyes and lid retraction and
depression with a dull stolidity to the countenance, and
there may be further clues in the “rheumatoid” hand
posture. However, here the art gallery ﬂaneur must beware the overlapping kinesics of melancholia and senility, both favorite themes of our great painters. A frequently cited example is the innkeeper in Rembrandt’s
sketch “The Good Samaritan.” The appearance of St.
Hugo of Grenoble in the Carthusian Refectory in Zurburan’s painting, housed in the Museo de Bellas Artes in
Sevilla, also strongly suggests Parkinsonism. Another
recently reported convincing example is the lithograph of
the Lithuanian ham seller Mr. Kulik portrayed by the
German artist Isidorus Weiss in 1814.6
Narrative accounts of Parkinson’s disease can also be
informative and the accounts of Wilhelm von Humboldt,
the Prussian scholar, reformer and statesman, provide an
early insight into what it was like to live with the shaking
palsy.7,48 Among the interesting observations which appeared in his “Letters to a Lady Friend” in 1829 he
described his own writing difﬁculties a tell-tale symptom, which had escaped Parkinson’s sharp eye. “I am
sorry for having written in such an unclear manner . . . .
unfortunately only too often I cause people trouble in
deciphering my handwriting. I think about this when I’m
writing, but my attention isn’t always the same and so I
become illegible.” A year later he had further illuminations on his difﬁculty; “you are completely right as my
hand’s difﬁculty in writing, this usually accompanies
ageing: there occurs either trembling or a situation I
prefer calling clumsiness rather than weakness. Writing,
if it has to be ﬁrm and clear, requires a lot of sometimes
very minute and hardly noticeable ﬁnger movements that
need to be made in rapid sequence but with clear distinction from each other. In ageing, suppleness is missing
in this respect. The same applies also to other acts such

S329

as buttoning up during dressing . . . . while the hand
maintains its strength for grabbing, carrying and holding).” This is a clear description of the components of
bradykinesia and Humboldt’s script is highly suggestive
of Parkinson’s disease, although Humboldt himself attributed this afﬂiction to premature ageing triggered by
the distress of his wife’s death, while his physician had
considered he had a “spinal cord weakness.” Humboldt
was forced in his later years to resort to writing in Latin
to try to overcome his loss of writing ﬂuency in German.8
In the last 30 years it has become commonplace for
patients to give narrative accounts about their Parkinson’s disease and although these are by deﬁnition idiosyncratic, they provide fascinating insights for the physician as to what it is like to be told you have Parkinson’s
disease and then live with it. A patient of mine told me
“it doesn’t kill you but it takes your life away,” another
woman said Parkinson’s made her feel like the damsel
held in the grip of King Kong as the monster strode
above the Manhattan skyline. Symptoms and signs as
described in the biography of the England football player
Ray Kennedy, and other patients have encouraged physicians to think more about the prodromal phase of the
illness and the latent interval between the inception of
the pathological process and the unequivocal emergence
of the cardinal motor sign.9,10 This has become an important and developing clinical research area in preparation for the discovery of treatments that can attenuate the
neurodegenerative process.
The early neurologists embellished and reﬁned Parkinson’s clinical description and I would particularly
single out the writings of Trousseau and Charcot in
France,11 Gowers12 and Kinnier Wilson13 in England and
Erb14 in Germany for particular commendation. Parkinson would have chastised himself for missing the drooling of saliva, the oiliness of the skin and the distinctive
cramped miniscule vanishing script,15 but he should be
excused from missing the cogwheel phenomenon,16 and
lead pipe rigidity, as the physical examination of the
nervous system was not yet part of the doctors’ clinical
method. He would have been fascinated to learn that the
majority of patients ﬁnd that their sense of smell has
declined17 and that half at least experience phantasmagorical, psychedelic visual illusions, and hallucinations.18 He did not know that many patients disturb their
bedmates with screams and violent ﬂinging movements
of the limbs while dreaming and that others are troubled
by drenching sweats and urgency of micturition. He
would not have been surprised to learn that there are
known to be many causes for the shaking palsy, although
the pill rolling rest tremor he described remains a reliable
marker for Parkinson’s disease as opposed to a second-

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

S330

A.J. LEES

ary or atypical variety. Parkinson’s description of “the
hand failing to answer with exactness to the dictates of
the will” is now described in medical jargon as bradykinesia, akinesia, or hypokinesia with the three terms often
and erroneously being used interchangeably.
Almost two centuries after Parkinson’s seminal description, and enormous leaps in our understanding of the
pathogenesis and molecular pathology of his malady,
rudimentary phenomenological, and semantic issues remain unresolved. Basic observational clinical studies relating to prognostic risk factors, prediction of individual
response to therapy, and the variable natural history of
the malady have not been given the serious attention they
warrant. For example, although most neurologists would
concur that it is a quiver in one hand which usually
brings the patient to neurological attention, it remains to
be conﬁrmed whether—as is commonly believed—the
disease is ever truly unilateral. If there is obvious bradykinesia or rest tremor in one hand when the patient is
ﬁrst examined, clinical appreciation of subtle bradykinesia in the hand on the other side may easily be overlooked. More sophisticated clinical methods to detect
subtle motor impairment particularly in the legs may
change our notion about the site of onset of Parkinson’s
disease. Functional imaging using dopamine transporter
ligands in patients considered to have unilateral very
early Parkinson’s disease has shown that in many cases
the striatal binding index is already markedly reduced to
a level where one might have predicted some motor
impairments on the apparently unaffected side.19 Recently Uitti and colleagues have taken another look at the
relation of handedness and the side of onset of Parkinson’s disease and suggested that at least in left handers,
the disease is more likely to start on the left.20
At least 60% of patients when they are ﬁrst seen have
a clear asymmetry of motor signs and as a general rule
the more striking the difference in symptom severity on
the two sides, the more likely an excellent sustained
response to levodopa therapy is to be. It is unclear
whether the asymmetry index in a particular patient
persists throughout the course of the whole illness.21 My
own impression is that the difference in motor disability
between the two sides lessens in many patients as the
disease progresses and in a few the side of the presenting
complaint— especially if tremor was the initial complaint—may actually be paradoxically less affected later
in the disease. I have also noted that some patients may
appear to have more difﬁculty on testing ﬁne ﬁnger
movements in one hand in one consultation and 3 months
later it appears the difﬁculties have become more pronounced on the other side only for the problem to switch
back again at the next visit. It is important to carry out

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

more than one sequential motor task with the ﬁngers as
there may be quite striking disparities and the correlation
with micrographia is also poor. Whereas L-dopa induced
peak dose chorea is invariably more severe on the more
affected side, off period dystonia may sometimes be
more disabling on the less affected side.22 Axial and
bilateral symmetrical presentations of Parkinson’s disease are more likely in those over 70 years when the
additional confounding effects of diffuse subcortical
white matter ischemia and the biological effects of ageing may modify the clinical presentation.23
Another interesting and unresolved clinical issue is
whether temporary remission may occur in the early
stages of the disorder. A few patients describe isolated
episodes of tremor which may have occurred up to a
decade before the diagnosis becomes unavoidable. I have
also seen 2 patients, both who had an associated depression, who once their unhappiness resolved lost their
bradykinesia and rigidity. One of these had a F-dopa PET
scan while she was suspected of having Parkinsonism
and was found to have reduced uptake at a level intermediate between normal controls and PD. The functional
imaging changes in this case resembled those reported in
some carriers of monogenetic Parkinsonism, some of
whom have gone on to express the disease. One might
speculate that compensatory measures due to neuronal
plasticity may be sufﬁcient to drive the pathogenic process back underground once the chemical changes associated with depression have reversed. At latest follow up
more than a decade after ﬁrst seen, neither of these
patients has developed Parkinson’s disease. Patients with
secondary Parkinsonism due to viral encephalitis or toxic
exposure may also have a full recovery despite residual
irreversible neuronal death. Conversely, there are a number of reports in which elderly individuals exposed to
neuroleptics develop irreversible Parkinsonism. The presumption is that these patients already have Lewy body
pathology and the chemical changes induced by the
neuroleptic set off a cascade of toxic events which cannot be corrected by drug discontinuation.24
Ten times more people have Lewy body pathology
than ever develop Parkinson’s disease and while it is
unclear what protects these individuals from developing
the clinical syndrome, it is likely that they are more
competent in walling off the pathogenic processes and
preventing the disease.25 Indeed it has been suggested
that the Lewy body itself may be a protective mechanism
to shield the neurone from further insult. Another unresolved clinical issue is whether the incidence rate of
Parkinson’s disease actually drops in the ninth decade as
is suggested by some epidemiological studies.26 Diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease is difﬁcult in the very old

ISSUES RELATING TO THE SHAKING PALSY
because soft basal ganglia signs are acknowledged as a
frequent component of ageing. If the incidence really
falls in the ninth decade then it would provide a strong
argument to reject the hypothesis that Parkinson’s disease is due to an acute environmental insult compounded
by the biology of ageing.
One of the strengths of Parkinson’s essay was his
accurate description of the course of the shaking palsy.
He emphasized the spread of the disease from one limb
and that in the early changes it impacted relatively little
on the patient’s quality of life, but by the end the patient
was severely incapacitated, dependent on others for everyday tasks, incontinent and cachectic. Poewe and Wenning have recently reported that the average delay in
spread from the affected limb to the unaffected ipsilateral
limb is about a year and for spread to the other side two
and a half years. They have also shown that the deterioration on the Uniﬁed Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale
is faster in the ﬁrst 2 years after diagnosis than later on
as bradykinetic and tremulous disabilities bottom out.
Analysis of the DATATOP data also provided support
for Hoehn and Yahr’s contention that there is a marked
heterogeneity in disease progression, with young onset
and predominant tremor being good prognostic
signs.27,28 Some of the young onset benign tremulous
patients are now recognized to carry the parkin or
PINK-1 mutations. In contrast, patients with prominent
early axial and bulbar signs and cognitive deﬁcits respond less well to L-dopa, progress more rapidly and
have a poorer prognosis.28 However, it is important to be
aware that a number of these “axial forms” of PD turn
out to have an alternative pathology at autopsy particularly neuroﬁbrillary tangles.
Parkinson’s hopes that the publication of his monograph might lead to elucidation of the anatomical substrate had to wait 80 years. Following the publication of
Blocq and Marinesco’s case report of a tuberculomatous
noisette in the midbrain which had caused contralateral
Parkinsonism,29 Edouard Brissaud speculated that the
localization must be subthalamic or peduncular and that
an ischemic lesion of the locus niger could be responsible for Parkinson’s disease. He acknowledged that this
was “a theory based on wise ignorance which recognized
itself.”30 Constantin Tretiakoff, a Russian working at the
Salpetriere Hospital in Paris, was set the task of conﬁrming Brissaud’s hypothesis. In his doctoral thesis of 1919
he described his ﬁndings following the examination of
ﬁfty-four substantia nigras. Nine of these had Parkinson’s disease and three von Economo’s disease. The
substantia was consistently affected in all the Parkinsonian patients and there were also associated “senile lesions.” Tretiakoff also noted that six of the brains also

S331

had “corps de Lewy” described in the dorsal nucleus of
the vagus in Parkinson’s disease 7 years earlier by Frederich Lewy.31,32 Despite Tretiakoff’s careful work severe damage to the pars compacta of the substantia nigra
was not generally accepted as the critical pathological
lesion in Parkinson’s disease until the later conﬁrmatory
neuropathological studies of Hassler33 and then Greenﬁeld and Bosanquet34 led to almost complete universal
acceptance.
The ventrolateral tier of the pars compacta bears the
brunt of the damage and by the later stages of the disease
very few neurones in this zone (Spedd and Spez of
Hassler)35 are still functioning normally. These nerve
cells project mainly to the dorsal putamen which is the
ﬁrst and most dopamine depleted area of the corpus
striatum. The micro-architecture of the substantia nigra is
also now recognized to be extremely complex with a
“Swiss cheese” like pattern with calbindin negative nigrosomes and a calbindin rich matrix.36,37 The nigrosomes correlate closely with the areas of maximal damage in the nigra in Parkinson’s disease raising the
possibility that calcium binding protein located predominantly, but not exclusively, in the dorsal tier may help to
protect these less vulnerable nigral neurones. Another
protein called Girk238 (G protein coupled inward rectifying current potassium channel type w2) is located only
in the ventral tier and it is of interest that the weaver
mouse model, better known as a paradigm for cerebellar
ataxia, loses 50% of all its dopaminergic nigral neurones
in the ﬁrst weeks of life, all of which are Girk 2 positive.
The surviving dopaminergic cells in the weaver mouse
all contain calbindin.
It has been estimated that cell loss in the pars compacta starts about 6 years before the ﬁrst motor signs are
clinically detectable by which point at least 75% of
neurones in the ventrolateral tier will have been
destroyed. Although the lesion of the pars compacta of
the substantia nigra is considered the pathological substrate for bradykinesia and rigidity, other brain stem
areas, the cerebral cortex, the enteric nervous system and
sympathetic ganglia also have Lewy body pathology.
Exactly what the relevance of these other damaged areas
such as the locus coeruleus, nucleus basalis of Meynert,
the dorsal nuclei of the vagus nerve, raphe nuclei and the
pedunculopontine nuclei is with respect to the clinical
picture remains unclear, but disturbances of the sleep/
wake cycle, pain, anxiety and depression, falls and freezing, constipation and dysphagia are common complaints
from patients and contribute signiﬁcantly to morbidity
and a reduced quality of life. Parkinson would have been
cheered by the recent attention paid by the anatomist
Braak and his colleagues to the anatomo–pathology of

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

S332

A.J. LEES

the malady. Although it remains unclear whether Lewy
bodies represent a defense mechanism to sequester and
detoxify potentially noxious proteins in neurones still
able to function, or are harbingers of cell death, there is
persuasive evidence to suggest that incidental Lewy
body pathology is associated with increased oxidative
stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal loss in
the nigra. This raises the strong possibility that those
elderly individuals who die without signs of Parkinson’s
disease but with Lewy body pathology in their brain
stems might have gone on eventually to develop the
disease if they had lived longer. The other intriguing
possibility is that these patients, although exposed to
cryptic exogenous insults which can lead to the cascade
of damage responsible for Parkinson’s disease, have the
biological capacity to contain it at a level which will not
lead to clinically apparent illness. Perhaps the one tenth
of cases with severe Lewy body pathology and Parkinson’s disease will prove to have a genetic susceptibility
to the illness which means their neuro-protective mechanisms fail to cope with the accumulating and varied
environmental insults.
Following on from his work in Alzheimer’s disease
where it is believed that the pathological process begins
in the entorhinal cortex and spreads to involve the neocortex, Braak has suggested on the basis of pathological
studies on control, incidental dorsal vagal nucleus Lewy
body brains and Parkinson’s disease tissue, that the
pathological process actually begins in the enteric nervous system, dorsal nucleus of the vagus and anterior
olfactory areas.39,40 This notion resonates with clinicians
because it is known that disturbances of bowel motility
and impairment of olfaction may precede the cardinal
motor symptoms in some patients. However, Braak’s
conclusions are derived from the assumption that Lewy
bodies are reliable markers for neuronal loss in Parkinson’s disease and brains with Lewy bodies in brain
regions other than the dorsal nucleus of the vagus were
not considered. A recent study has failed to show any
correlation between either the degree of cell loss or Lewy
body load in the dorsal nucleus of the vagus and the
severity of constipation in Parkinson’s disease.41 There is
also no cell loss in the ventrolateral parts of the nucleus
ambiguus, the region believed to be important in cardiovascular autonomic function and known to be damaged
in multiple system atrophy.42
There is also no evidence that the severity of Lewy
body pathology in the nigra is correlated with either
neuronal loss or more importantly bradykinesia. Before
Braak’s challenging observations can be accepted cell
counts will need to be carried out in the dorsal nucleus of
the vagus and olfactory regions in incidental Lewy body

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

brains and age matched controls, as it is known that
Lewy bodies may be found in brain regions like the basal
nucleus of the amygdala where little or no cell loss
occurs. More groups of aged patients need to be prospectively studied at autopsy43,44 and more brains of young
onset PD dying before the age of 55, and young control
brains, need to be examined for alpha synuclein pathology. In vivo prospective functional imaging needs to be
correlated with pathology and, ﬁnally, a series of patients
with Lewy body dementia need to be studied to determine if the dorsal nucleus of the vagus and olfactory
structures are consistently affected. This latter issue is of
considerable importance not least because the correlation
of dementia in Parkinson’s disease does not correlate
closely with neocortical Lewy body burden.45
Studies attempting to quantify the impact of Parkinson’s disease on quality of life have conﬁrmed that
symptoms such as depression, pain, constipation and
sleep disturbances contribute importantly to morbidity,
and this has led to a renewed interest in these frequently
associated symptoms. However, it remains unclear
whether these symptoms result as a direct consequence
of the primary disease process or whether they are secondary nonspeciﬁc ﬁndings. Nevertheless, if severe visual failure occurred in 80% of patients with Parkinson’s
disease as is the case with hyposmia, then it is hard to
conceive that it would not have been embraced as a
cardinal feature of the illness. One of the problems with
respect to the nonmotor symptoms and even some of the
motor disabilities like freezing and rest tremor has been
to correlate them with the known pathology of the disease. Quantiﬁcation of neuronal loss in particular nuclear
groups is an exacting and imprecise technique although
stereoscopic methodology has led to some improvement
and an awareness that a number of structures like the
pedunculopontine nucleus, nucleus basalis of Meynert
and ventral segmental dopaminergic cell groups may
have substantially greater neuronal loss than is seen in
controls. In fact a neuropathologist who was unaware of
the characteristic clinical picture of Parkinson’s disease
might consider that the pathological lesions might be
more likely to produce a disorder with prominent cognitive, neuropsychiatric and autonomic disturbance than
one dominated by motor handicap.
However, if one focuses on the relatively few patients
who have died from Parkinson’s disease under the age of
50, the described lesion is much more restricted and
patients with juvenile L-dopa responsive Parkinsonism
have not been noted to have Lewy body pathology. After
10 to 15 years of disease bradykinesia, rigidity and
tremor deteriorate very little and nigral cell loss is an
exponential process with a more rapid fall out in the

ISSUES RELATING TO THE SHAKING PALSY
early years of disease. Another intriguing observation is
that in many patients rest tremor seems to diminish as the
disease evolves. Late deterioration in Parkinson’s disease
is often due to freezing of gait with damaging falls,
swallowing and speech deterioration and dementia.
Some patients also have disabling autonomic symptoms
including bladder and bowel dysfunction and syncope.
These axial, bulbar and cognitive deﬁcits may also be
prominent in the ﬁrst 5 years of the disease particularly
in patients presenting over the age of 70 years. As a
consequence of these observations disease progression in
Parkinson’s disease depends on the age of the patient and
not the disease duration. A biological interaction between the primary neurodegenerative process responsible for Parkinson’s disease, and the effects of ageing and
co-existing diffuse cerebrovascular pathology on nondopaminergic structures leading to late decompensation,
could explain these ﬁndings. An alternative explanation
might be that the age of onset inﬂuences the clinical
presentation. There is another interesting suggestion that
“atypical features” such as gaze palsies, autonomic failure and gait and bulbar presentations with a poorer
response to L-dopa may occur in black Africans and
patients originating from the Indian subcontinent, but
this needs substantiating with further pathological
studies.46
As a compassionate physician Parkinson felt helpless
in the face of this brutal disease and resorted in desperation to blood letting and the application of vesicatories
despite warning colleagues against the irrational use of
nostrums. He also wryly commented on the healthy
scepticism of his patients who seemed resigned to the
incurable nature of the disorder. Despite this he held out
hope that a disease-modifying therapy might eventually
be discovered. “On the contrary, there appears to be
sufﬁcient reason for hoping that some remedial process
may ere long be discovered, by which, at least the
progress of the disease may be stopped.”
The vital discovery of severe depletion of dopamine in
the corpus striatum stemming from new anatomical and
chemical techniques was just the sort of advance Parkinson had hoped for when writing his monograph. However, despite our increased understanding of the pathological processes which underlie the shaking palsy, no
effective disease modifying therapy has materialized. If
alive today Parkinson would be exhorting the leaders of
our profession to develop more reliable methods of assessing disease progression and encouraging our great
universities to devote more of their time to translational
drug discovery. He would caution against the increasing
disregard for clinical observational studies which can
result in such important advances in patient outcome

S333

measures. Old Hubert would also have much advice for
governmental agencies and Pharma. He would advise a
radical and urgent reform of the Drug Approval process
arguing that a relaxation of the current emphasis of proof
of efﬁcacy might lead to faster progress. He would
recommend that Parkinson’s disease could be considered
an “orphan disease” and encourage the pharmaceutical
industry to invest more in innovative therapies. He would
demand a review of the patent laws which no longer
protect original drug development and encourage imitators and generic drugs. He would see the harm excessive
bureaucratic road blocks have had on clinical research
and the reduction in the number of practicing clinicians
involved in decision making in academic medicine. He
would cajole the pharmaceutical industry to adopt a more
ﬂexible approach to drug development and not to rely as
heavily on reductionist target driven models for Parkinson’s disease at the expense of environmental data, phenotypic screens and serendipitous observations. Despite
these concerns the humble London practitioner would no
doubt also feel a twinge of pride that the shaking palsy
had now established itself as a recognizable nosological
entity and that his hopes that his monograph would
encourage further study had been fulﬁlled.
REFERENCES
1. Rowntree L. James Parkinson. Bull Johns Hopkins Hosp 1912;23:
33–35.
2. Parkinson J. An essay on the shaking palsy. London: Sherwood,
Neely and Jones; 1817.
3. Currier R. Did John Hunter give James Parkinson an idea? Arch
Neurol 1996;53:377-378.
4. Stern GM. James Parkinson 1755-1824. Parkinson’s disease. Baltimore: Chapman and Hall; 1990. p XIII-XXVII.
5. Sagar J. Systema morborum symptomaticum ecs. Vienna: Kraus
Class; 1771. V11: 4, XX11,3.
6. Budrys V. Parkinson’s disease before Parkinson, Vilnius 1814. J R
Soc Med 2005;98:178-179.
7. Lakke J. Wilhelm von Humboldt and James Parkinson. An appraisal of observation and creativity. Parkinsonism Relat Disord
1996;2:225-229.
8. Horowski R, Horowski L, Calne SM, Calne DB. From Wilhelm
von Humboldt to Hitler—are prominent people more prone to have
Parkinson’s disease? Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2000;6:205-214.
9. Lees AJ. When did Ray Kennedy’s Parkinson’s disease begin?
Mov Disord 1992;7:110-116.
10. Lees AJ. Ray of hope. The Ray Kennedy story. London: Penguin,
1993.
11. Charcot J. Lecons sur les Maladies du Systeme Nerveux Faites a la
Salpetriere. Paris: Masson, 1880.
12. Gowers W. A manual of diseases of the nervous system. London:
Churchill, p 1886-1888.
13. Wilson S. Neurology. London: Arnold, 1947.
14. Erb W. Paralysis agitans (Parkinsonische Krankheit). Die deutsche
klinik. E. a. K. Leyden, F. Berlin, Urban and Schwarzenberg
1901;6 (Part 1):31-50.
15. McLennan JE, Nakano K, Tyler HR, Schwab RS. Micrographia in
Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Sci 1972;15:141-152.
16. Ghiglione P, Mutani R, Chiò A. Cogwheel rigidity. Arch Neurol
2005;62:828-830.

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

S334

A.J. LEES

17. Hawkes C. Olfactory testing in parkinsonism. Lancet Neurol 2004;
3:393-394.
18. Williams DR, Lees AJ. Visual hallucinations in the diagnosis of
idiopathic Parkinson’s disease: a retrospective autopsy study. Lancet Neurol 2005;4:605-610.
19. Pirker W. Correlation of dopamine transporter imaging with parkinsonian motor handicap: how close is it? Mov Disord 2003;18
(Suppl 7):S43–S51.
20. Uitti RJ, Baba Y, Whaley NR, Wszolek ZK, Putzke JD. Parkinson
disease: handedness predicts asymmetry. Neurology 2005;64:
1925-1930.
21. Lee CS, Schulzer M, Mak E, Hammerstad JP, Calne S, Calne DB.
Patterns of asymmetry do not change over the course of idiopathic
parkinsonism: implications for pathogenesis. Neurology 1995;
45(3, Part 1):435-439.
22. Toth C, Rajput M, Rajput AH. Anomalies of asymmetry of clinical
signs in parkinsonism. Mov Disord 2004;19:151-157.
23. Jankovic J. Progression of Parkinson disease: are we making
progress in charting the course? Arch Neurol 2005;62:351-352.
24. Rajput AH, Rozdilsky B, Hornykiewicz O, Shannak K, Lee T,
Seeman P. “Reversible drug-induced parkinsonism. Clinicopathologic study of two cases. Arch Neurol 1982;39:644-646.
25. McNaught KS, Shashidharan P, Perl DP, Jenner P, Olanow CW.
Aggresome-related biogenesis of Lewy bodies. Eur J Neurosci
2002;16:2136-2148.
26. Twelves D, Perkins KS, Counsell C. Systematic review of incidence studies of Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2003;18:19-31.
27. Hoehn MM, Yahr MD. Parkinsonism: onset, progression and mortality. Neurology 1967;17:427-442.
28. Poewe WH, Wenning GK. The natural history of Parkinson’s
disease. Ann Neurol 1998;44(3 Suppl 1):S1–S9.
29. Blocq P. Sur un cas de tremblement parkinsonien hemiplegique
symptomatique d’une tumeur du peduncule cerebrale. Rev Neurol
1894;2.
30. Brissaud E. Nature et pathogenie de la maladie de Parkinson (lecon
23). Lecons sur les Maladies du Systeme Nerveux. Recueilles et
publiees par Henry Meige. Paris: Masson; 1895. p 488-501.
31. Lewy F. Paralysis agitans. I. Pathologische anatomie. In: Lewandowsky M, editors. Handbuch der neurologie. Berlin: Springer;
1912. p 920-933.
32. Tretiakoff C. Contribution a l’etude de l’anatomie pathologique du
locus niger de Soemmering avec quelques deductions relatives a la
athogenie des troubles du tonus musculaire et de la maladie de
Parkinson. Paris; Jouve and Co. 1919.
33. Hassler R. Zur Pathologie der paralysis agitans und des postenzephalitschen Parkinsonismus. J f Psychol u Neurol 1938;48:
387-476.

Movement Disorders, Vol. 22, Suppl. 17, 2007

34. Greenﬁeld JG, Bosanquet FD. The brain-stem lesions in Parkinsonism. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1953;16:213–226.
35. Hassler R. Zur Normalanatomie der Substantia Nigra. Versuch
einer architektonischen Gliederung. J f Psychol u Neurol 1937;48:
1-55.
36. Damier P, Hirsch EC, Agid Y, Greybiel AM. The substantia nigra
of the human brain. I. Nigrosomes and the nigral matrix, a compartmental organization based on calbindin D(28K) immunohistochemistry. Brain 1999;122 (Part 8):1421-1436.
37. Damier P, Hirsch EC, Agid Y, Greybiel AM. The substantia nigra
of the human brain. II. Patterns of loss of dopamine-containing
neurons in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 1999;122 (Part 8):14371448.
38. Mendez I, Sanchez-Pernaute R, Oliver C, et al. Cell type analysis
of functional fetal dopamine cell suspension transplants in the
striatum and substantia nigra of patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Brain 2005;128 (Part 7):1498-1510.
39. Braak H, Del Tredici K, Rub U, de Vos RA, Jansen Steur EN,
Braak E. Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 2003;24:197-211.
40. Braak H, Ghebremedhin E, Rub U, Bratzke H, Del Tredici K.
Stages in the development of Parkinson’s disease-related pathology. Cell Tissue Res 2004;318:121-134.
41. Benarroch EE, Schmeichel AM, Sandroni P, Low PA, Parisi JE.
Involvement of vagal autonomic nuclei in multiple system atrophy
and Lewy body disease. Neurology 2006;66:378-383.
42. Benarroch EE, Schmeichel AM, Low PA, Boeve BF, Sandroni P,
Parisi JE. Involvement of medullary regions controlling sympathetic output in Lewy body disease. Brain 2005;128 (Part 2):338344.
43. Parkkinen L, Kauppinen T, Pirttila T, Alafuzoff I. Alpha-synuclein
pathology does not predict extrapyramidal symptoms or dementia.
Ann Neurol 2005;57:82-91.
44. Parkkinen L, Pirttila T, Tervahauta M, Alafuzoff I. Widespread
and abundant ␣-synuclein pathology in a neurologically unimpaired subject. Neuropathology 2005;25:304-314.
45. Colosimo C, Hughes AJ, Kilford L, Lees AJ. Lewy body cortical
involvement may not always predict dementia in Parkinson’s disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2003;74:852-856.
46. Chaudhuri KR, Hu MT, Brooks DJ. Atypical parkinsonism in
Afro-Caribbean and Indian origin immigrants to the UK. Mov
Disord 2000;15:18-23.
47. Stern GM. Did Parkinsonism occur before1817? J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1989; (Suppl):11-12.
48. Horowski R, Horowski L, Vogel S, Poewe W, Kielhorn FW. An
essay on Wilhelm von Humboldt and the shaking palsy: ﬁrst
comprehensive description of Parkinson’s disease by a patient.
Neurology 1995;45(3, Part 1):565-568.

