British Journal of Pharmacology (2006) 147, S136–S144

& 2006 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0007 – 1188/06 $30.00
www.nature.com/bjp

Dopamine: the rewarding years
*Charles A. Marsden
School of Biomedical Sciences, Institute of Neuroscience, Medical School, Queen’s Medical Centre, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham NG7 2UH

Keywords:
Abbreviations:

Dopamine has moved from being an insignificant intermediary in the formation of noradrenaline in
1957 to its present-day position as a major neurotransmitter in the brain. This neurotransmitter is
involved in the control of movement and Parkinson’s disease, the neurobiology and symptoms of
schizophrenia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. It is also considered an essential element
in the brain reward system and in the action of many drugs of abuse. This evolution reflects the ability
of several famous names in neuropharmacology, neurology and psychiatry to apply new techniques to
ask and answer the right questions. There is now excellent knowledge about the metabolism of
dopamine, dopamine receptor systems and the structural organisation of dopamine pathways in the
brain. Less is known about the function of the different receptors and how the various dopamine
pathways are organised to produce normal behaviour, which exhibits disruption in the disease states
mentioned. In particular, we have very limited information as to why and how the dopamine system
dies or becomes abnormal in Parkinson’s disease or a neurodevelopmental disorder such as
schizophrenia. Dopamine neurones account for less than 1% of the total neuronal population of the
brain, but have a profound effect on function. The future challenge is to understand how dopamine
is involved in the integration of information to produce a relevant response rather than to study
dopamine in isolation from other transmission systems. This integrated approach should lead to
greater understanding and improved treatment of diseases involving dopamine.
British Journal of Pharmacology (2006) 147, S136–S144. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706473
Dopamine; dopamine receptors; dopamine pathways; L-DOPA; Parkinson’s disease; schizophrenia; drug
dependence; reward; attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; CNS, central nervous system; COMT, catechol-o-methyltransferase; CREB, c-AMP response element-binding protein; DAT, dopamine membrane transporter; ECD,
electrochemical detection; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; GABA, g-aminobutyric acid; HPLC,
high-performance liquid chromatography; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; IUPHAR, International Union of
Pharmacology; L-DOPA, L-dihydroxyphenylalanine; MAO, monoamine oxidase; MPTP, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,23,6-tetrahydropyridine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NIMH, National Institute for Mental Health;
NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; 6-OHDA, 6-hydroxydopamine; PET, positron emission tomography; phMRI,
pharmacological magnetic resonance imaging; SERT, serotonin membrane transporter; SPET, single-photon
emission tomography; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter; VTA, ventral tegmental area

Introduction
This is an age in which celebrity status appears to be a human
aim. Dopamine has certainly achieved that status in the
neurotransmitter world with a highly successful book (Awakenings by Oliver Sachs), which inspired a play by Harold
Pinter and was then converted to an equally compelling film in
1990 starring Robin Williams and Robert De Niro. The book
and the film brought to the written word and the silver screen
the dramatic effects of the use of L-DOPA in patients.
Dopamine has also made frequent appearances in television
science programmes so bringing the transmitter to the
attention of a wider public. The celebrity status of dopamine,
in contrast to many present-day ‘celebrities’, is however one of
substance.
Understanding of the importance of dopamine for normal
brain function has had a major impact on the treatment of
important neurological (such as Parkinson’s disease) and
psychiatric disorders (such as schizophrenia and, more

*Author for correspondence; E-mail: Charles.marsden@nottingham.ac.uk

recently, attention deficit hyperactivity disorders (ADHD)).
Dopamine also has a social importance as the neurotransmitter that plays a central role in the mechanism of action of the
major substances of abuse and, in particular, those associated
with dependence and addiction. The impact of dopamine
extends beyond treatment of disease to the development of
experimental and diagnostic tools with which we have been
able to investigate brain neurotransmitter function in the living
human brain and offer important future diagnostic opportunities. The early positron emission tomography (PET) studies
on neurotransmission exploited the availability of suitable
dopaminergic ligands to show dopamine loss in Parkinson’s
disease in the living patient.
These advances have been achieved by an impressive cast of
scientists from around the world, making the best use of the
methodology available at the time to provide vital information
that has gradually filled in at least some of the missing pieces
of the dopamine jigsaw. Both Arvid Carlsson with Paul
Greengard and Eric Kandel (2000), and Julius Axelrod, with
Ulf von Euler and Sir Bernard Katz (1970), were awarded

C.A. Marsden

Nobel Prizes. Arvid Carlsson for his work on dopamine
systems and Julius Axelrod for his work on catecholamine
metabolism including the identification of the importance of
O-methylation (Axelrod, 1957). Many other famous names in
pharmacology have been involved in the story and it is fitting
in the present context of the 75th Anniversary of the BPS that
it was Henry Dale who first examined the biological activity of
dopamine in the same year (1910) as George Barger and James
Hill who synthesised 3,4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine at The
Wellcome Laboratories in London, and indeed it was Henry
Dale who first suggested the shorter name dopamine in 1952
(Hornykiewicz, 1986).
The aim of this short review is to highlight some of the
important steps that have taken place in the evolution of our
understanding of the function of dopamine with specific
reference to its role in the brain. This does not attempt to be
a balanced account as there is an obvious bias to the event
this special issue celebrates – 75 years of the BPS and British
Pharmacology. The major examples that I draw on are the
involvement of dopamine in Parkinson’s disease and the
development of symptomatic treatment for this disease.
Another example is the importance of dopamine in the
treatment of schizophrenia and emerging ideas about the
neurodevelopmental aspects of mental disorder with a shift in
interest from dopamine in the accumbens to understanding the
complex interaction between dopamine function in cortical
areas, the prefrontal cortex in particular and subcortical
dopaminergic systems. The final area is the role of dopamine in
reward and the mechanism of action of drugs of abuse. The
emphasis on brain function purely reflects the research
interests of the author and it is important to stress that
dopamine is not restricted to the brain, but has important
functional implications outside the brain including cardiovascular function.

Dopamine

S137

striatum in high concentrations where there was very little
noradrenaline (Bertler & Rosengren, 1959). These findings led
to the subsequent work by Hornykiewicz on post-mortem
Parkinsonian human brain (Ehringer & Hornykiewicz, 1960).
The next important step was the development of the
fluorescence histochemical method by Hillarp & Falk for
the visualisation of catecholamine and indoleamine (5-HT)
neurones and their pathways in the brain (for details of the
methodology, see Corrodi & Johnsson, 1967). With this
method, Kjell Fuxe and Annika Dahlstrom together with
others, including a young Urban Ungerstedt who later played
an essential role in the development of the microdialysis
technique, produced the first evidence for neuronal pathways
containing dopamine that projected from the substantia nigra
to the striatum and the ventral tegmental area (VTA) to the
limbic areas of the rat brain (Dahlström & Fuxe, 1965; Andén
et al., 1966). This relatively simple plan of the dopamine
pathways in the brain has been refined over the years with
dopaminergic input to the frontal cortex being identified (see
later), but the basic plan remains. It was at this point that I
entered research and my PhD used the fluorescence histo-

A brief history of dopamine
While dopamine was first synthesised in 1910, it was not until
the mid-1950s that it began to emerge as a substance of
importance in its own right rather than just an intermediary in
the formation of noradrenaline. There are excellent reviews of
the early history of dopamine by Oleh Hornykiewicz (1986;
2002), who himself played such an important role in the initial
studies showing loss of dopamine in post-mortem brains from
Parkinsonian patients and the subsequent use of L-DOPA in
such patients (Birkmayer & Hornykiewicz, 1961). The present
account will be restricted to the key steps in the story.
Herman Blaschko at Oxford, who worked on monoamine
oxidase (MAO) in the early years (see also Youdim & Bakhle,
this issue), was one of the first to suggest that dopamine may
be physiologically significant, a view substantiated by studies
showing that dopamine could lower blood pressure and this
effect was potentiated by inhibition of MAO (Blaschko, 1957).
Incidentally, my first viva voce examination was conducted by
Herman Blaschko and in such a manner that it was a factor
that led me to stay in research; he also asked the first question
after my first presentation at a BPS meeting. At about the
same time, Kathleen Montagu (1957) and Arvid Carlsson,
together with Lindqvist, Magnusson and Waldeck (Carlsson
et al., 1958), identified dopamine in the brain, and in 1959, the
Swedish group showed that dopamine was found in the

Figure 1 Giant dopamine-containing neurone in the left pedal
ganglia of Planorbis corneus. The upper photograph is a whole
mount of the two ganglia showing the giant dopamine neurone (G,
as dopamine produces a green fluorescence with the Falk–Hillarp
method) in the left ganglion. The other fluorescing cells are yellow
and contain 5-HT (serotonin). The lower photograph is a section
through the left pedal ganglion showing the large dopamine neurone
with its axon. This neurone was used in subsequent metabolic and
electrophysiological studies (Berry & Cottrell, 1973).

British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

S138

C.A. Marsden

chemical technique to visualise dopamine and 5-HT in the
ganglia (‘brains’) of snails and the leech. My lucky break came
with the identification of a giant neurone in the pond snail
Planorbis corneus containing dopamine (Marsden & Kerkut,
1970; Figure 1). Up to that time, the only dopamine cells
identified in invertebrates were very small and therefore
unsuitable for electrophysiological investigation, which was
the essential technique for pharmacological structure–activity
studies at that time, as exemplified by work carried out by
Walker and Woodruff using the snail Helix aspersa (Walker
et al., 1968).
Although by the mid-1960s the presence of dopamine in the
brain and its loss in Parkinson’s disease had been established,
the effectiveness of L-DOPA treatment demonstrated and
dopamine pathways in the brain visualised, there was still
debate about whether dopamine had a neurotransmitter role
related to its presence in neurones or some other function.
Marthe Vogt described a ‘‘constant discharge of dopamine
from terminals of nigrostriatal neurones’’ (Portig & Vogt,
1969), but still expressed doubts that dopamine was a
conventional neurotransmitter (Vogt, 1973). Annika Dahlström (1973) was equally cautious when she stated that in the
central nervous system (CNS) ‘‘the central neurones synthesise
store and, in all likelihood, release noradrenaline, dopamine
and 5-hydroxytryptamine’’. It was the identification of specific
receptors and the development of selective agonists and
antagonists that finally removed the caution.

Dopamine receptors, pathways and their
function
While the 1960s and 1970s were mainly concerned with
establishing an independent role for dopamine and making
the first tentative steps in determining its physiological and
behavioural functions, the 1980s were the receptor years with

Table 1

Dopamine

the development of techniques allowing study of links between
specific receptors and the function of specific dopamine
pathways within an increasingly complex system of neuronal
interactions.
The first evidence for the presence of a dopamine receptor in
brain came from experiments showing the stimulation of
adenylyl cyclase activity by dopamine (Kebabian et al., 1972).
A little later Philip Seeman began to search for the brain’s
antipsychotic receptor and identified a site that could be
labelled by both dopamine and haloperidol and the binding of
both was inhibited by nanomolar concentrations of unlabelled
haloperidol. This site was originally called the ‘neuroleptic/
dopamine receptor’ (Seeman et al., 1976), but was later
renamed the dopamine D2 receptor in an important paper
that classified the dopamine receptors into D1 and D2 based on
their pharmacology and coupling to adenylyl cyclase (Kebabian & Calne, 1979). This receptor remains a key target for
antipsychotic drugs, although it is also known to be linked to
various adverse side effects associated with such drugs (see
later). It was not until the early 1980s that the dopamine D2
receptor in the pituitary, thus the receptor involved in the
control of prolactin release, was shown to inhibit adenylyl
cyclase, in contrast to the stimulation produced by the
dopamine D1 receptor.
The 1980s also saw the arrival of molecular biology and gene
cloning of receptors, which led to further dopamine receptors
being identified, although they all fitted neatly into the original
D1/D2 classification based on sequence homology, adenylyl
cyclase response and pharmacology (Table 1). Several members of the BPS were involved in this phase of dopamine
receptor identification including Geoff Woodruff (Woodruff
et al., 1977) and Philip Strange (Strange, 1991). While
discovery of receptor binding sites was important, the next
step was to determine their distribution in the brain using
autoradiography and then relating that distribution to what we
knew about dopamine pathways and their function. More
recently, attention has moved to understanding the intra-

General overview of the properties of the dopamine receptor subtypes
‘D1-like’
D1

D5

‘D2-like’
D2(short)/(long)

D3

D4

414/443(h)
415/444(r)
Spiperone
Raclopride
Clozapine
S33084

400(h)
446(r)
Spiperone
Raclopride
Clozapine
L745870

387(h, r)
Spiperone
Raclopride
Clozapine
S33084

Amino acids

446(h, r)

Antagonists

SCH 23390

477(h)
475(r)
?

Homology
With D1 receptor
With D2(short)

100
44

82
49

44
100

44
76

42
54

Caudate/putamen,
nucleus accumbens,
olfactory tubercle,
hypothalamus,
thalamus, frontal
cortex
Adenylyl cyclase m

Hippocampus,
thalamus, lateral
mamillary nucleus,
striatum, cerebral
cortex (all low)

Caudate/putamen,
nucleus accumbens,
olfactory tubercle,
cerebral cortex (low)

Nucleus accumbens,
olfactory tubercle,
islands of Calleja,
cerebral cortex (low)

Adenylyl cyclase m

Adenylyl cyclase k

Adenylyl cyclase k

Frontal cortex,
midbrain, amygdala,
hippocampus,
hypothalamus,
medulla (all low),
retina
Adenylyl cyclase k

Receptor
localization

Response

This classification is based on the IUPHAR Compendium of Receptor Characterization and Classification. Complete details are available
in Alexander et al. (2004). Differences between the human and rat forms of the receptors are indicated by (h) and (r), respectively. The D2
receptor exists in short and long variant spliced forms; these forms have similar, but not identical, pharmacology. This table has been
adapted from one originally produced by Philip Strange.

British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

C.A. Marsden

S139

Dopamine
Pre-frontal Cortex
D1 Post-synaptic
D2 Pre-synaptic
D3 Pre-synaptic?

Nucleus Accumbens
(ventral striatum)

D1 Post-synaptic
D2 Pre & Post-synaptic
D3-?

D2-Pre-synaptic
DA

DA
VTA
Glutamate

Figure 2 David Marsden (centre) with Peter Jenner on his right at
a meeting in 1984 (photograph kindly provided by Peter Jenner).

cellular proteins and pathways that are regulated by different
dopamine receptor pathways. We now know that receptors do
not act in isolation, but exist in a complex that includes
regulatory and scaffolding molecules, which in turn could offer
novel drug targets, but more importantly may hold the key to
understanding how environmental factors produce long-term
or irreversible effects on neurotransmission.
As already mentioned, the original fluorescence histochemical studies, derived from approximately 15,000–20,000
mesencephalic neurones, had identified the major dopaminemediated pathways. These can be summarised as follows:
1. The nigrostriatal pathway from the substantia nigra to the
caudate putamen (dorsal striatum) is the pathway primarily
associated with Parkinson’s disease. Both D1 (excitatory)
and D2 (inhibitory) receptors are found in the striatum,
where the D2 receptor is located both pre- and postsynaptic,
while the D1 receptors are postsynaptic. The important role
of these two receptors in the dorsal striatum is to modulate
the function of the direct and indirect pathways, from the
motor cortex and back to the cortex via the thalamus,
involved in the control and initiation of motor plans. D2
receptors in the striatum also act as the presynaptic
inhibitory autoreceptor and antagonism of these receptors
by the classical antipsychotic drugs, such as haloperidol,
results in increased dopamine release, which may be an
important factor in the development of tardive dyskinesias
by these drugs, while antagonism of striatal postsynaptic D2
receptors can explain the initial extrapyramidal side effects of
those drugs (Marsden et al., 1975). This is an appropriate
point to introduce David Marsden (Figure 2) – no direct
relation to me – who had such an impact on British and
international neurology and neuropharmacology through his
work on Parkinson’s disease and antipsychotic drugs before
his sudden early death in 1998. His long-time collaborator at
Kings College, Peter Jenner, however, has ensured continuation of the work on Parkinson’s disease (see later).
2. The pathways from the VTA to the limbic areas of the
brain (accumbens, ventral striatum and amygdala), known
as the mesolimbic pathway, and the mesocortical pathway
from the VTA to the cortex (medial, prefrontal, cingulate

GABA

Figure 3 Simplified diagram showing the neural pathways linking
the prefrontal cortex, the nucleus accumbens and the ventral
tegmental area (VTA). At least three transmitters are involved in
these links – dopamine, glutamate and GABA. The positive
symptoms of schizophrenia can be reduced by antagonism of
postsynaptic D2 receptors in the accumbens, while the negative and
cognitive symptoms are associated with reduced dopamine function
in the prefrontal cortex. Agonists at the D1 receptors can increase
glutamate function and D2/D3 antagonism may also increase
glutamate function by inhibiting GABA. The numbers of D2
receptors in the prefrontal cortex are low; here the D3 receptor
may have a functionally similar role to the D2 receptor.

and entorhinal cortex) are both associated with reward and
schizophrenia, although, as will be discussed later, our
understanding of the role of dopamine in schizophrenia has
evolved over the past 30 years (Figure 3) and we cannot
ignore a role for the dorsal striatum in aspects of addiction.
The D1 receptor has the widest distribution of all the
dopamine receptors in the brain and it is found in
association with the mesolimbic pathway as is the D2
receptor. Importantly, the dopamine D3 receptor, which
has certain functional and pharmacological similarities to
D2 receptors, is specifically localised in limbic areas and is
not found in the striatum, so is an obvious potential drug
target. There are also relatively more D4 receptors in the
limbic dopaminergic regions than in the striatum, although
overall expression of D4 receptors is low, with the relative
abundance of dopamine receptors in the rat CNS being
D14D24D34D54D4 (Jaber et al., 1996).
3. The final major dopamine pathway runs from the arcuate
and periventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus to the
intermediate lobe of the pituitary and the median eminence.
This system forms the tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway important in the inhibitory control of prolactin and is
mediated by the D2 receptor. Increased prolactin release is a
side effect of conventional antipsychotic drugs and changes
in plasma prolactin were very effectively used by Tim Crow
and colleagues to show that D2 receptor antagonism was
the key action in the antipsychotic effect of these drugs
(Johnstone et al., 1978). Furthermore, one of the first
clinical uses of a selective dopamine agonist (bromocriptine) was to treat infertility due to hyperprolactinaemia. In
the past few years, the functional distinction between dorsal
and ventral striatum has become blurred through the work
of several research groups including that of Trevor Robbins
British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

S140

C.A. Marsden

in Cambridge. The idea that psychostimulants act only on
reward and reinforcement mechanisms located in the
ventral (accumbens) striatum is an oversimplification, as
some of these effects can be mediated by sites in the dorsal
striatum. The most important overlap between the areas
occurs with cognitive function and behavioural correlations
appear better served by thinking in terms of a dorsolateral
to ventromedial functional organisation (see review by
Voorn et al., 2004).

From receptors and pathways to function:
methodological advances
Early studies attempting to identify the functions of dopamine
in the brain were limited by the experimental tools available.
The first pharmacological tool was reserpine, but it was not
selective for dopamine as it depleted all amines from their
storage vesicles. In a similar manner, the tyrosine hydroxylase
inhibitor, a-methyl-para-tyrosine, prevented the synthesis of
both dopamine and noradrenaline. Amphetamine was little
better as it released both of the catecholamines, although later
studies demonstrated that dopamine was the major contributor to the gross behavioural effects observed such as
hyperlocomotion and stereotypy. Following the discovery of
dopamine receptors and the link with both schizophrenia and
Parkinson’s disease, more selective compounds began to
appear that acted as agonists of antagonists at specific
dopamine receptor subtypes and this opened up the field of
dopamine behavioural pharmacology to which Susan Iversen
and her laboratory in Cambridge made a very important
contribution.
Apart from the emerging drugs, an even older compound
had a profound influence on dopamine research. 6-Hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) had been shown to deplete peripheral
noradrenaline in a paper written by Laverty in the British
Journal of Pharmacology in 1965. Unable to cross the blood–
brain barrier, it was not until 6-OHDA was given by central
injection that a similar depletion was seen in the brain, which
also included depletion of dopamine (Laverty & Taylor, 1970;
Uretsky & Iversen, 1970). Subsequently, Urban Ungerstedt in
Sweden used local injections into specific dopamine pathways
and the well-known rotational model was born, and it was now
possible to produce specific lesions of dopamine pathways,
independent of effects on noradrenergic pathways. My first
in vivo studies on the rat in 1971 used the Ungerstedt rotational
model to look at dopamine-serotonin interactions. Over the
next few years, numerous papers appeared that linked
dopamine to various behaviours including locomotor activity,
stereotyped behaviours, learning, motivation, food intake,
reward and intracranial self-stimulation.
Another neurotoxic agent has also played an important role
in our understanding of dopamine in Parkinson’s disease by
producing a more reliable model of the disease than that
produced by 6-OHDA. 1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2-3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) was originally synthesised in the 1960s, but
it came to wider notice in the 1980s when it was tracked down
by Langston at Stanford University as the cause of a sudden
increase in Parkinsonian-like symptoms in young adults in
Northern California. The drug was identified as a contaminant
in some locally produced ‘synthetic heroin’, self-administered
by the individuals showing the Parkinsonian-like symptoms.
British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

Dopamine

We now know that it is not MPTP that cause the dopamine
neurotoxicity, but that MPTP is metabolised by MAO-B to
MPP þ , either within dopamine neurones or astrocytes, and
it is the MPP þ that causes neurodegeneration by inhibiting
mitochondrial complex 2 and the production of free radicals.
Peter Jenner and many others (see also Youdim & Bakhle, this
issue) have used the MPTP model in various animal species to
identify potential new drug targets not just for the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson’s disease but also to test
strategies that might lead to more permanent recovery
(Treseder et al., 2000). The use of L-DOPA, in the form of
carbidopa, has been a very successful approach to the
pharmacological replacement of the deficient dopamine system
in the disease, but there are problems such as the diminishing
response with time and development of the ‘on–off’ profile of
the treatment. Furthermore, certain cognitive and emotional
side effects occur and, in some patients, a drive to abuse the
drug develops. Some of these problems can be overcome by the
use of selective dopamine agonist drugs such as ropinirole and
this approach may in future be further developed using drugs
with more selectivity for a particular subtype or the use of
partial dopamine agonists. Other potential drug targets are
other neurotransmitter systems that modulate dopamine
function, such as adenosine. The use of non-pharmacological
approaches including neurosurgery and deep brain stimulation
also have a role in symptomatic treatment. The long-term aim,
however, is the development of treatments that either prevent
loss of dopamine in the first place or replace the lost dopamine
neurones. In the latter situation, transplantation of embryonic
mesencephalic neurones has been tried, but with limited
success, probably due to poor survival, and a future alternative
will be the use of stem cells engineered to produce dopamine.
With all these approaches, initial studies using the MPTP
model will be an essential step.
Successful use of 6-OHDA and MPTP is dependent upon
the ability to show you have produced an adequate lesion of
either the dopamine or noradrenaline system and this requires
reliable sensitive assay methods for both. The early methods
involved tissue extraction and then, in some cases, chromatographic (paper or column) separation, followed finally by
fluorimetric measurement. The assays were laborious and
lacked the sensitivity for measurements from small brain
regions. These problems were overcome by the arrival of
HPLC separation combined with electrochemical detection
(ECD). The ECD method was developed by Ralph Adams,
with whom I was lucky enough to work during 1977 in
Lawrence, Kansas, and he had the vision to see that the
detector could be miniaturised and implanted into the brain so
that constant recordings could be made. The aim was to
develop a method for on-line measurement of dopamine and
5-HT release or, at least, the extracellular levels of these amines
(Conti et al., 1978). Ralph and I demonstrated the method of
in vivo voltammetry at the summer meeting of the BPS held at
Nottingham in 1978, my last whole animal demonstration at a
BPS meeting. We then presented the data at the European
Neuroscience Association meeting in Florence where we met
Urban Ungerstedt who was developing the microdialysis
method for the same purpose. To cut a long story short, the
microdialysis method combined with HPLC and ECD has
provided a reliable method for detecting changes in extracellular dopamine (Zetterström et al., 1983) both in response
to drugs and behavioural situations but the response time is

C.A. Marsden

slow, as normally the minimum collection time is 5 min or
more. Voltammetry on the other hand allows real-time
measurement, but there are issues with the interpretation of
the signal obtained as the electrodes available are not specific
to dopamine but also detect the metabolites of dopamine. Both
approaches, however, have made a considerable impact on our
understanding of the relationship between dopamine release
and behavioural events.
In the last decade or so, other techniques have played an
important role in research into the functional role of dopamine
neurones in the brain as well as in our understanding of other
mediator systems. Central among these methods is the use of
genetically engineered mice to investigate functional aspects
of specific receptors as well as the membrane dopamine
transporter (DAT). We are also starting to see the application
of both functional and pharmacological magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI or phMRI) and PET techniques to the
investigation of preclinical issues relating to dopamine function. For example, the use of phMRI with the blood oxygen
level-dependent (BOLD) response will allow the identification
in the living animal of brain regions that are either activated or
deactivated by a specific drug. When combined with appropriate animal models, we should be able to get information
about how drug responses may differ between the normal and
the disease state.

Schizophrenia: from the dopamine hypothesis
to neurodevelopmental abnormality
The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia grew out of the
observation in the 1960s that amphetamine-induced psychosis
had similarities with schizophrenia and amphetamine acts
by increasing catecholamine function, through dopamine in
particular. Finally, Philip Seeman (Seeman et al., 1976)
showed that haloperidol and dopamine bind to the same site
and then demonstrated an excellent correlation between drug
dose required to treat the positive symptoms of schizophrenia
and the ability of the drug to bind to the dopamine D2
receptor. The importance of the D2 receptor in the action of
these drugs was further clarified, by Tim Crow and colleagues,
in an elegant clinical study that compared the effects of the two
isomeric forms of flupenthixol, only one of which had affinity
for the D2 receptor, on the symptoms of the disease and on the
increase in plasma prolactin produced by D2 antagonism. The
results showed that it was only the isomer (a-flupenthixol) with
affinity for the D2 receptor that reduced the symptoms and
increased prolactin (Johnstone et al., 1978). The question
remained as to whether schizophrenia was associated with an
identifiable abnormality in the dopaminergic systems in the
brain. Extensive studies on post-mortem brain found no
consistent presynaptic changes but suggested that postsynaptic
D2 receptor numbers were increased in the accumbens,
although there remains debate about the importance of these
findings and, in particular, whether the change is drug induced
or a consequence of the disease. More recently, using SPET
imaging methodology, Laurelle and co-workers have shown
that schizophrenic patients release more dopamine than
healthy controls (Laruelle et al., 1996). One interesting and
sustained report from Gavin Reynolds demonstrated laterality
in the change in dopamine with an increase in the right, but not
left, amygdala (Reynolds, 1983).

Dopamine

S141

While evidence accumulated for D2 receptor antagonism
being important in the treatment of the positive symptoms of
schizophrenia, these drugs were far from perfect due to their
side-effect profile and their failure to treat either the negative
or cognitive symptoms of the disease. Antagonism of
dopamine receptors in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway
was inferred from the reduction of the positive symptoms and
similar antagonism of D2 receptors in the striatum explained
the acute Parkinsonian-like side effects. However, the longterm tardive dyskinesias were more difficult to account for and
even today are still a bit of an enigma. The concept of
presynaptic receptors and autoinhibitory control of transmitter release was originally proposed for peripheral noradrenaline in a publication by Brown and Gillespie in the Journal of
Physiology in 1957 and then extended by Salomon Langer in
the early 1970s, taking into account developments in our
understanding of receptor mechanisms. Long-term antagonism of the presynaptic D2 receptor results in prolonged
increase in dopamine release, which may ‘break through’ the
postsynaptic receptor blockade to produce the excessive
expression of striatal function (Marsden & Jenner, 1980).
The obvious aim of the drug developers was to produce new
antipsychotic drugs with fewer extrapyramidal (striatal) side
effects. One approach to the problem was to exploit the new
information about the distribution of the various dopamine
receptor subtypes and the obvious choice was to target the D4
receptor that was found in the limbic regions but not the
striatum; however, this approach yielded no drugs of value.
Clozapine, which was shown to have fewer extrapyramidal side
effects and a complex pharmacology, formed the blueprint for
the next approach and subsequent drugs such as risperidone
and olanzapine had reduced D2 antagonism combined with
activity at other sites including 5HT2A, so the ‘magic bullet’
approach was replaced by drugs with a ‘rich pharmacology’.
The new atypical antipsychotics have reduced the number of
side effects, but not successfully treated the negative symptoms
or cognitive impairments and the search is on for appropriate
receptor targets.
The growing emphasis on the cognitive deficits and the need
to understand the neural system that underlies them has
altered the approach to schizophrenia research in recent years.
This has been coupled with the emergence of powerful brain
imaging techniques that have demonstrated organic changes in
the schizophrenic brain – identified before the arrival of MRI,
again by Tim Crow, but enhanced in value by MRI. The
evidence of nondegenerative ventricular enlargement and
reduced hippocampal cortical size supported the concept of
schizophrenia being neurodevelopmental in origin. The change
in cortical organisation with the disorder has resulted in a reevaluation of the role of dopamine in schizophrenia. It is now
apparent that some of the core symptoms (negative symptoms
and cognitive deficits) of schizophrenia are not related to
increased dopamine, but rather to decreased dopamine
function in the prefrontal cortex (the mesocortical dopamine
system). Thus, schizophrenia may result from a primary
neurodevelopmental disruption to the cortical brain areas
causing reduced prefrontal cortical dopamine function, which
in turn, together with reduced glutamate, enhances mesolimbic
dopamine function. This means re-evaluation too of the
dopamine treatment strategies and the possible value of partial
agonist treatment, first suggested by Arvid Carlsson in 1988, to
produce increased prefrontal cortex function while decreasing
British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

S142

C.A. Marsden

mesolimbic function. An example of this approach is given by
aripiprazole, which has often been described as a dopamine
system stabilizer. This compound is a partial agonist at
dopamine D2 receptors and at 5HT1A receptor, but a highaffinity agonist at 5HT2A receptors.
Another approach is to exploit the differential locations of
dopamine D2 and D3 receptors. The two receptors have very
similar pharmacology, but there are very limited numbers of
D2 receptors in the prefrontal cortex while D3 receptors are
relatively abundant. Amisulphride is equally potent as an
antagonist at D2 and D3 receptors and shows efficacy in
treating both positive and negative symptoms with low
extrapyramidal side effects (Figure 3). A third approach may
be to selectively activate postsynaptic D1 receptors in the
prefrontal cortex either alone or in conjunction with upregulation of the glutamate NMDA receptor.
The problem of cognitive deficits, including poor attention
and executive function, remains and there is now an emphasis
on developing suitable animal models of this aspect of
schizophrenia, combined with modelling the potential early
environmental factors. One such model is the postweaning
isolation reared rat, extensively worked on in the U.K. by
Trevor Robbins and co-workers in Cambridge and ourselves in
Nottingham, which shows relevant behavioural deficits and
neuropharmacological features as well as neuropathological
changes to the cortex and hippocampus. The phencyclidine
model based on NMDA receptor function disruption has also
undergone detailed further evaluation by Judith Pratt and
Brian Morris in Glasgow (Cochran et al., 2003) and shows
considerable promise. Current views support the hypothesis
that schizophrenia is a complex interaction between environmental and genetic factors and, in recent years, the gene
encoding the enzyme catechol-o-methyltransferase (COMT),
which metabolises catecholamines including dopamine, has
attracted most attention. COMT exists in low- and highactivity forms and the high-activity form is more prevalent in
patients with schizophrenia. This finding could explain the low
dopamine function in the prefrontal cortex as the dopamine
nerve terminals in this area do not have dopamine reuptake
sites and are thus dependent on enzymatic degradation to
inactivate dopamine. Interestingly, other studies by Daniel
Weinberger at NIMH have shown alternative mutations,
which decrease COMT activity and so increasing dopamine
function in the prefrontal cortex and these individuals show
enhanced executive functioning. These findings suggest that
COMT inhibitors, such as tolcapone, could help restore
normal cognitive functioning in schizophrenia.
One final point of interest is the possible similarities in terms
of the involvement of prefrontal cortical function in the
cognitive problems associated with schizophrenia and ADHD
– advance in one may help the other.

Dopamine: dependence, reward and drugs
of abuse
There is strong evidence that drugs of abuse which produce
reward, cause reinforcement and may cause dependence, also
increase dopamine release in mesolimbic regions. These drugs
include opiates, cannabis, nicotine as well as drugs acting
directly on presynaptic dopamine terminals (amphetamine,
methamphetamine and cocaine; see also Corbett et al., this
British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

Dopamine

TYROSINE

DOPA
DA

DA

DA

VMAT2

MAO

Reactive
DA metabolites

DAT
Methamphetamine
Figure 4 Possible mechanism for the neurotoxicity produced by
methamphetamine. This amine enters dopamine neurones/terminals
via the dopamine transporter (DAT) and then releases dopamine
from vesicles and prevents storage there by blocking the vesicular
transporter (VMAT2). Methamphetamine also inhibits the activity
of mitochondrial MAO involved in the catabolism of dopamine
while increasing its synthesis by stimulating tyrosine hydroxylase.
The net result is an increase in cytostolic dopamine, which may be
metabolised to reactive dopamine metabolites, resulting in neuronal
damage and degeneration. Adapted from Larsen et al. (2002).

issue). There is vast literature on this socially and scientifically
important area of research. During 2004–2005, the U.K.
Foresight Programme, managed by the Office of Science and
Technology, ran a project that enquired into how scientific and
technological advances might impact on our understanding of
addiction and drug use over the next 20 years. The project was
led by David Nutt, Trevor Robbins and Gerry Stimson. One
outcome of the project was the production of 15 comprehensive reviews of topics relating to drugs of abuse and addiction
which are available on the Foresight website (www.foresight.
gov.uk).
I will restrict my present comments to a few key items
relating to the pharmacology of the drugs that remain
unanswered after 40 years of dopamine research.
Monoamine uptake across neuronal cell membranes carried
out by the appropriate transporters, such as DAT and SERT,
is now well understood and has resulted in the development of
numerous important drugs that act on these transporter
systems (see also Iversen, this issue). The pioneering work in
this area by Leslie Iversen dates back to the 1960s. The
importance, however, of the other uptake systems associated
with monoamine nerve terminals, which control vesicular
monoamine uptake in the brain (VMAT2) is much less
understood. Can differences in the effects of structurally
related drugs on vesicular uptake help explain differences in
their rewarding and reinforcing properties? For example,
amphetamine and methamphetamine, but not methylphenidate (Ritalin), block vesicular uptake, which may explain the
differences in response between the first two drugs and Ritalin.
More information is required about the relationship between
these two transporter systems.

C.A. Marsden

There is a rise in methamphetamine use in the U.S.A. and in
South-East Asia, particularly among the young, with growing
concern about the ability of the drug to cause dopaminergic
neurodegeneration. How and under what conditions does such
degeneration occur? One possibility is that methamphetamine
enters the dopamine neurones using the membrane DAT, and
releases dopamine from vesicles while also preventing storage
there and increasing synthesis (Figure 4). The net result is raised
levels of cytostolic dopamine, which can be converted into
reactive dopamine metabolites, as the normal intraneuronal
route of catabolism through MAO is inhibited by methamphetamine (Larsen et al., 2002). Ecstasy is another drug of concern,
although in that case the concern is about loss of serotonergic
innervation. Both are amphetamines and so common basic
mechanisms may be involved in their neurotoxic potential.
Stimulant drugs remain the major treatment for ADHD, yet
we still know little about possible long-term use of such
compounds on the developing brain. Likewise, drug abuse is
common in young humans, yet most experimental studies use
‘adult’ animals. There is a need for more work on how drugs of
abuse might affect the developing brain and for us not to consider
children as ‘little adults’ when it comes to drugs and dopamine.

What about the future?
Our understanding of the role of dopamine in the brain
continues to unfold and I am sure BPS members will continue
to be involved in this process as there is much to do. We know
a lot about the dopamine D1 and D2 receptors, but less about
the other three dopamine receptors, although such information
will emerge with the use of knockout mice. For example, use of
male and female D5 knockout mice have shown this receptor

Dopamine

S143

to be involved in the rewarding aspects of sexual behaviour –
receptivity in females and intromissions in males. New
advances will occur in our knowledge of how dopamine
receptors control or modulate different aspects of behaviour.
Another knockout has raised an intriguing question as to
whether reward can occur in the absence of dopamine. Claire
Cannon and Richard Palmiter have shown that mice unable to
synthesise dopamine, as they lack tyrosine hydroxylase, are
still able to demonstrate a preference for sucrose, which is a
natural reward process.
We can expect great progress to be made in the understanding of the link between dopamine receptor occupation
and altered gene expression. There is already evidence that this
is effected not just through the classical adenylyl cyclase and
CREB phosphorylation pathways, but may involve other quite
different routes such as mechanisms dependent on b-arrestin-2.
A further alternative for the D2 receptor is action through
prostate apoptosis response-4, a molecule linked to apoptosis
and neuronal death.
Finally, the emphasis so far has been on investigating
dopamine in isolation from other transmitter systems. The
increasing awareness of the neuronal organisation of cortical
areas and their links with subcortical regions makes it essential
that we investigate the expression of physiological and
behavioural responses involving dopamine in an integrated
manner. Dopamine neurones account for less than 1% of the
neurones in the brain, but changes in the levels or functional
state of brain dopamine can have profound behavioural
effects, suggesting that the role of dopamine is not to relay
specific information but to integrate information relevant to
the incoming biologically important stimuli. Dopamine
research has yielded great scientific rewards and clinical
benefits and I am sure more will come in the future.

References
ALEXANDER, S.P.H., MATHIE, A. & PETERS, J.A. (2004). Dopamine

CORRODI, H. & JOHNSSON, G. (1967). The formaldehyde fluorescence

receptors, in Guide to Receptors and Channels. Br. J. Pharmacol.,
141, S25.
ANDÉN, N.E., DAHLSTRÖM, A., FUXE, K., LARSSON, K., OLSON, L. &
UNGERSTEDT, U. (1966). Ascending monoamine neurons to the
telencephalon and diencephalons. Acta Physiol. Scand., 67, 313–326.
AXELROD, J. (1957). The O-methylation of epinephrine and other
catechols in vitro and in vivo. Science, 126, 1657–1660.
BERRY, M.S. & COTTRELL, G.A. (1973). Dopamine: excitatory and
inhibitory transmission from a giant dopamine neurone. Nat. New
Biol., 242, 250–253.
BERTLER, Å. & ROSENGREN, E. (1959). Occurrence and distribution
of dopamine in brain and other tissues. Experientia, 15, 10–11.
BIRKMAYER, W. & HORNYKIEWICZ, O. (1961). Der L-dioxyphenylalanin ( ¼ DOPA) – Effekt bei der Parkinson-Akinese. Wien. Klin.
Wschr., 73, 787–788.
BLASCHKO, H. (1957). Metabolism and storage of biogenic amines.
Experientia, 13, 9–12.
CARLSSON, A., LINDQVIST, M., MAGNUSSON, T. & WALDECK, B.
(1958). On the presence of 3-hydroxytyramine in brain. Science,
127, 471.
COCHRAN, S.M., STEWARD, L., KENNEDY, M., MCKERCHAR, C.,
PRATT, J.A. & MORRIS, B.J. (2003). Induction of metabolic
hypofunction and neurochemical deficits after chronic intermittent
exposure to phencyclidine: differential modulation by antipsychotic
drugs. Neuropsychopharmacology, 28, 265–275.
CONTI, J., STROPE, E., ADAMS, R.N. & MARSDEN, C.A. (1978).
Voltammetry in brain tissues: chronic recording of stimulated
dopamine and 5-hydroxy-tryptamine release. Life Sci., 23, 2705–2716.

method for the histochemical demonstration of biogenic amines.
A review on the methodology. J. Histochem. Cytochem., 15, 65–78.
DAHLSTRÖM, A. & FUXE, K. (1965). Evidence for the existence of
monoamine neurons in the central nervous system. Acta Physiol.
Scand., 64, 1–85.
DAHLSTRÖM, A. (1973). Aminergic transmission, introduction and
short review. Brain Res., 62, 441–460.
EHRINGER, H. & HORNYKIEWICZ, O. (1960). Verteilung von
Noradrenalin und Dopamin (3-Hydroxytyramin) im Gehirn des
Menshen und ihr Verhalten bei Erkrankungen des extrapyramidalen Systems. Klin. Wschr., 38, 1236–1239.
HORNYKIEWICZ, O. (1986). A quarter century of brain dopamine
research. In: Dopaminergic Systems and their Regulation. eds. Woodruff, G.N., Poat, J.A. & Roberts, P.J. pp. 3–18. London: Macmillan.
HORNYKIEWICZ, O. (2002). Dopamine miracle: from brain homogenate to dopamine replacement. Movement Disord, 17, 501–508.
JABER, M., ROBINSON, S.W., MISSALE, C. & CARON, M.G. (1996).
Dopamine receptors & brain function. Neuropharmacology, 35,
1503–1519.
JOHNSTONE, E., CROW, T.J., FRITH, C.D., CARVEY, M.W. & PRICE,
J.S. (1978). Mechanism of the antipsychotic effect in treatment of
chronic schizophrenia. Lancet, 1, 848–851.
KEBABIAN, J.W. & CALNE, D.B. (1979). Multiple receptors for
dopamine. Nature, 277, 93–96.
KEBABIAN, J.W., PETZOLD, G.L. & GREENGARD, P. (1972).
Dopamine-sensitive anenylate cyclase in caudate nucleus of rat
brain and its similarity to the dopamine receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A., 69, 2145–2149.

British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

S144

C.A. Marsden

Dopamine

LARSEN, K.E., FON, E.A., HASTINGS, T.G., EDWARDS, R.H. &
SULZER, D. (2002). Methamphetamine-induced degeneration of

REYNOLDS, G.P. (1983). Increased concentrations and lateral asymmetry

dopaminergic neurones involves autophagy and upregulation of
dopamine synthesis. J. Neurosci., 22, 8951–8960.
LARUELLE, M., ABI-DARGHAM, A., VAN DYCK, C.H., GIL, R.,
D’SOUSA, C.D., ERDOS, J., MCCANCE, E., ROSENBLATT, W.,
FINGADO, C., ZOGHBI, S.S., BARDWIN, R.M., SEIBYL, J.P.,
KRYSTAL, J.H., CHARNEY, D.S. & INNIS, R.B. (1996). Single
photon emission computerized tomography imaging of amphetamine-induced dopamine release in drug-free schizophrenic subjects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 93, 9235–9240.
LAVERTY, R. & TAYLOR, K.M. (1970). Effects of intra-ventricular
2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylethylamine (6-hydroxydopamine) on rat
behaviour and brain catecholamine metabolism. Br. J. Pharmacol.,
40, 836–846.
MARSDEN, C.A. & KERKUT, G.A. (1970). The occurrence of
monoamines in Planorbis corneus: a fluorescence microscopic and
microspectrometric study. Comp. Biochem. Pharmacol., 1, 101–116.
MARSDEN, C.D. & JENNER, P. (1980). The pathophysiology of
extrapyramidal side effects of neuroleptics drugs. Psychol. Med., 10,
55–72.
MARSDEN, C.D., TARSY, D. & BALDESSARINI, R.J. (1975). Spontaneous and drug-induced movement disorders in psychotic patients.
In: Psychiatric Aspects of Neurological Disease. eds. Benson, D.R. &
Blumer, D., p. 219, New York: Grune & Stratton.
MONTAGU, K.A. (1957). Catechol compounds in rat tissues and in
brains of different animals. Nature, 180, 244–245.
PORTIG, P.J. & VOGT, M. (1969). Release to the cerebral ventricles of
substances with possible transmitter function in the cnadate
nucleus. Foresight-Brain Science, Addiction and Drugs, www.foresight.
gov.uk.

SEEMAN, P., LEE, T., CHAU-WONG, M. & WONG, K. (1976).

British Journal of Pharmacology vol 147 (S1)

of amygdala dopamine in schizophrenia. Nature, 305, 527–529.
Antipsychotic drug doses and neuroleptics/dopamine receptors.
Nature, 261, 717–719.
STRANGE, P.G. (1991). Interesting times for dopamine receptors.
Trends Neurosci., 14, 43–45.
TRESEDER, S.A., JACKSON, M. & JENNER, P. (2000). The effects of
central aromatic amino acid DOPA decarboxylase inhibition on the
motor actions of L-DOPA and dopamine agonists in MPTP-treated
primates. Br. J. Pharmacol., 129, 1355–1364.
URETSKY, N.J. & IVERSEN, L.L. (1970). Effects of 6-Hydroxydopamine on catecholamine containing neurones in the rat brain.
J. Neurochem., 17, 269–278.
VOGT, M. (1973). Functional aspects of the role of catecholamines in
the central nervous system. Br. Med. Bull, 29, 168–172.
VOORN, P., VANDERSCHUREN, L.J.M.J., GROENEWEGEN, H.J.,
ROBBINS, T.W. & PENNARTZ, C.M.A. (2004). Putting a spin on the
dorsal–ventral divide of the striatum. Trends Neurosci., 27, 468–474.
WALKER, R.J., WOODRUFF, G.N. & KERKUT, G.A. (1968). The effect
of acetylcholine and 5-hydroxytryptamine on electrophysiological
recordings from muscle fibres of the leech, Hirudo medicinalis.
Comp. Biochem. Physiol., 24, 987–990.
WOODRUFF, G.N., WATLING, K.J., ANDREWS, C.D., POAT, J.A. &
MCDERMED, J.D. (1977). Dopamine receptors in rat striatum and
nucleus accumbens; conformational studies using rigid analogues of
dopamine. J. Pharm. Pharmacol., 29, 422–427.
ZETTERSTRÖM, T., SHARP, T., MARSDEN, C.A. & UNGERSTEDT, U.
(1983). In vivo measurement of dopamine and its metabolites by
intracerebral dialysis: changes after D-amphetamine. J. Neurochem.,
41, 1769–1773.

