617

Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 30 (2012) 617–627
DOI 10.3233/JAD-2012-120145
IOS Press

Degraded Mitochondrial DNA is a Newly
Identified Subtype of the Damage Associated
Molecular Pattern (DAMP) Family and
Possible Trigger of Neurodegeneration
Alex Mathewa , Tara A. Lindsleyb , Anna Sheridanb , Devang L. Bhoiwalaa , Shazaan F. Hushmendya ,
Eric J. Yagera,c , Elizabeth A. Ruggieroa and Dana R. Crawforda,∗
a Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, The Albany Medical College, Albany, NY, USA
b Center for Neuropharmacology and Neuroscience, The Albany Medical College, Albany, NY, USA
c School of Arts and Sciences, Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Albany, NY, USA

Handling Associate Editor: M. Flint Beal

Accepted 22 February 2012

Abstract. We previously showed a preferential degradation and down-regulation of mitochondrial DNA and RNA in hamster
fibroblasts in response to hydrogen peroxide. Subsequent studies by others demonstrated that mitochondrial DNA can stimulate
immune cells as a DAMP (damage associated molecular patterns) family member. However, the actual physical structure of
this mitochondrial DNA DAMP and its importance in non-immune cell types are poorly understood. Here we report that transfected oxidant-initiated degraded mitochondrial polynucleotides, which we term “DeMPs”, strongly induce the proinflammatory
cytokines interleukin 6, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, and tumor necrosis factor ␣ in mouse primary astrocytes. Additionally,
proinflammatory IL1␤ was induced, implicating DeMPs in inflammasome activation. Furthermore, human cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) and plasma were found to contain detectable DeMP signal. Finally, significant degradation of mitochondrial DNA was
observed in response to either a bolus or steady state hydrogen peroxide. Combined, these studies demonstrate, all for the
first time, that a pathophysiologically relevant form of mitochondrial DNA (degraded) can elicit a proinflammatory cytokine
induction; that a brain cell type (astrocytes) elicits a proinflammatory cytokine induction in response to these DeMPs; that
this induction includes the inflammasome; that astrocytes are capable of inflammasome activation by DeMPs; that DeMPs are
detectable in CSF and plasma; and that hydrogen peroxide can stimulate an early stage cellular degradation of mitochondrial
DNA. These results provide new insights and are supportive of our hypothesis that DeMPs are a newly identified trigger of
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, which are known to be associated with early stage inflammation and
oxidation.
Keywords: Astrocytes, damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), degraded mitochondrial polynucleotides (DeMPs),
hydrogen peroxide, inflammasome, mitochondria, oxidative stress, proinflammatory cytokine

INTRODUCTION
∗ Correspondence to: Dana

R. Crawford, Ph.D., Center for
Immunology and Microbial Disease MC-151, The Albany Medical College, Albany, New York 12208, USA. Tel.: +1 518 262 6652,
E-mail: crawfod@mail.amc.edu.

Elevated levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
can lead to oxidative stress and subsequent oxidation of all major classes of cellular macromolecules;
depletion of intracellular antioxidants and energy

ISSN 1387-2877/12/$27.50 © 2012 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

618

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

stores; the release of intracellular stores of calcium;
and the inhibition of important cellular processes
and signal transduction pathways [1–4]. Many diseases and disorders have been associated with chronic
exposure to oxidative stress, including neural disorders, emphysema, arthritis, cancer, atherosclerosis,
cataracts, and aging [1, 3, 5, 6]. Mitochondria
are especially sensitive to oxidative damage. ATP
depletion, loss of electron transport capacity, calcium release, alterations in membrane potential, and
mitochondrial-specific lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and DNA damage are all consequences of
cellular exposure to oxidants [6–9]. This sensitivity
is compounded by the fact that the mitochondrial electron transport chain represents a major
site of ROS generation. A growing number of diseases have also been associated with mitochondrial
genomic alterations and aberrant RNA expression [10,
11].
We previously reported that HA-1 hamster ovary
cells down-regulate and degrade both mitochondrial
RNA and DNA following exposure to hydrogen
peroxide [12–14]. These down- regulations were
calcium-dependent, and specific to mitochondria,
as cytoplasmic RNAs and nuclear DNA were
not degraded under the same conditions. Furthermore, we observed that both growth arrest and
apoptosis were associated with peroxide-induced
mitochondrial polynucleotide degradation [14, 15].
These results suggested an important role for
these degraded mitochondrial polynucleotides in
signaling. Subsequent studies by others have demonstrated that mitochondrial DNA can indeed signal;
specifically, stimulate immune cells as a DAMP
(damage-associated molecular patterns) family member.
DAMP molecules are a relatively recently uncovered family group that trigger immune response
[16–23]. Unlike related PAMPs (pathogen-associated
molecular patterns), they are able to trigger inflammatory immune responses in the absence of infection.
A growing number of DAMPs have been identified, most notably high-mobility group box 1
(HMGB1) protein, S100 protein, heat shock protein, ATP, and DNA. DNA has long been known
to be a pathogen-associated molecular pattern agonist [24–26]. However, more recently, mitochondrial
(but not nuclear) DAMP DNA has also been found
to stimulate an immune response, raising the levels
of proinflammatory cytokines and immunomodulators
released from immune cells [18, 19, 22, 27–31]. The
stimulatory activity of mitochondrial DNA has been

found to be due to the presence of unmethylated CpG
motifs, which are also present in microbial DNAs.
DAMPs are released from damaged and dying cells
to serve as danger signals or alarmins, and act by
engaging a number of different pattern recognition
receptors including extracellular and intracellular toll
like receptors, and intracellular inflammasomes. These
interactions, in turn, lead to unregulated cytokine and
chemokine production as part of immune response
[16–23, 27–31]. In the case of inflammasomes,
DAMPs act as stimulators that initiate inflammasome
assembly, leading to the specific elevation and activation of interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-18 [19, 23, 29, 30, 32].
Several different inflammasomes exist, most notably
members of the so-called NLR family. AIM2 is yet
another inflammasome type, and is often referred to
as the DNA inflammasome due to its ability to sense
double stranded DNA from bacteria, virus or even host
prior to oligomerization.
It has long been known that circulating mitochondrial and nuclear nucleic acids are present in
human blood [33–36]. Importantly, elevated levels of these circulating nucleic acids are found
in plasma from patients suffering pathologies such
as brain disorders, infection, rheumatoid arthritis,
transplantation, and cancer [25, 30–33]. Despite
this strong correlation with pathologies, as well as
cell based studies that have demonstrated cytokine
and immunomodulator induction with mitochondrial
DNA [18, 19, 22, 27, 28, 30], the exact physical structure of these important signaling molecules
has never been reported. Instead, reported studies
have relied on PCR for detection and quantization
(e.g., [18, 25, 32, 33]), which does not provide
insight into the overall physical structure, and which
most likely assumes whole intact mitochondrial
genome.
Here, we assess the ability of structurally degraded
mitochondrial DNA in triggering immune response
using isolated mitochondria from a cell based
system (an extension of previous studies on HA1 cells), and also assess the in vivo structural
state of mitochondria in human bodily fluids
(human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma). We
observe, for the first time, that degraded mitochondrial DNA is strongly immunogenic; that this
immunogenicity occurs in astrocytes and includes
inflammasomes; and that circulating mitochondrial
DNA exists in a degraded or partially degraded
state, suggesting the use of this structural form as
a new prognostic and diagnostic marker of disease.

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture and treatment
HA-1 hamster fibroblasts were generously provided
by Dr. Douglas Spitz (University of Iowa) and cultured
in minimum essential medium (MEM; Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA) supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 units/ml), and
streptomycin (100 ␮g/ml). Primary cultures of type
1 astroglia were prepared from cerebral cortices of
2-d postnatal ES129 mice, essentially as described
for rat astrocyte cultures [37], and as approved and
described by the Albany Medical College animal care
and use committee protocol. Briefly, cortices were
dissected and the meninges carefully removed. The tissue was minced then dissociated with 0.25% Trypsin
(Invitrogen) in 10 mM HEPES-buffered Hanks balanced salt solution containing 1% DNase for 15 min
at 37◦ C. Dissociated cells were collected by passage
through a 70 ␮m mesh cell strainer into MEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 0.6% glucose and 10% horse
serum, penicillin (100 units/ml), and streptomycin
(100 ␮g/ml) (Glial MEM), followed by centrifugation for 7 min at 120 × g to remove undissociated
tissue and enzymes. Cells were resuspended in Glial
MEM and plated at a density of 7.6 × 106 cells per
T75 flask. The medium was replaced after 1 d, then
twice a week until the cells became confluent (7–10 d).
The cells were passaged by brief incubation with
Trypsin/EDTA (Invitrogen) at 37◦ C and frozen in 70%
MEM, 20% fetal bovine serum and 10% DMSO.
Thawed astroctyes were plated in Glial MEM at a
density of approximately 50,000 cells per well and
the medium was replaced twice a week until the cultures were 80% confluent (1–2 weeks). This protocol
yields nearly pure astrocytes as demonstrated by GFAP
immunostaining (not shown). Both cell types were
incubated in a humidified incubator atmosphere of 95%
air and 5% CO2 at 37◦ C.
Isolation of puriﬁed and oxidant-initiated
degraded mitochondrial DNA
HA-1 cells were subdivided into groups and exposed
to hydrogen peroxide (Sigma Chemical Company, St.
Louis, MO), glucose oxidase (Sigma; Type X-S from
Aspergillus niger), or solvent only control. All cultures were then returned to the incubator for the period
required. At this time, cultures were removed, scraped,
centrifuged, and the cell pellets resuspended in isotonic
media (0.25 M sucrose; 20 mM Tris, pH 7;4; and 1 mM

619

EDTA). The pellets were then homogenized and spun
5 min at 1200 × g at 4◦ C to remove nuclei and unbroken cells. The supernatants were collected and respun
under the same conditions. The supernatants were
again collected and centrifuged 20 min at 16,000 × g
to pellet the mitochondria. The supernatants were
discarded and the mitochondrial pellets rinsed once
to remove any residual cytoplasm. The mitochondria
were then resuspended, lysed, RNAse treated, and
DNA purified using QiaAmp columns according to the
manufacturer (Qiagen, Valencia, CA).
Quantitation of glucose oxidase-generated
hydrogen peroxide
For hydrogen peroxide quantitation, glucose oxidase was added to serum-free HA-1 cell cultures at
50% confluency, and cultures returned to the incubator for the appropriate times. At this time, the amount
of hydrogen peroxide present in the media was determined using the hydrogen peroxide detection kit from
Enzo Life Sciences (Farmingdale, NY) according to
their directions. Sample hydrogen peroxide levels were
determined by interpolation of standard curves.
Mitochondrial DNA oxidation status
HA-1 cells were exposed to solvent only (control) or
350 ␮M of hydrogen peroxide for 2 h, cells collected,
and mitochondrial DNA extracted. These DNAs were
then dot blotted to nylon membrane, UV-irradiated,
and hybridized with antibody specific to oxidized guanine (oxoG) obtained from Cayman Chemical (Ann
Arbor, Michigan), followed by peroxidase-conjugated
secondary antibody and signal development with Western light chemiluminescent substrate (Perkin Elmer,
Boston, MA). Signals were captured on film and quantified using the ImageJ program.
Isolation of DNA from human CSF and plasma
CSF was obtained from the Albany Medical Center Chemistry laboratory under the direction of Jane
Noblett from six de-identified patient samples that
were centrifuged prior to storage to remove cells. These
samples were then combined prior to DNA purification. Plasma DNA was obtained from two volunteers,
centrifuged, and the supernatant collected. DNAs were
then isolated as above using QiaAmp columns from
Qiagen. All human fluid collections were carried out
according to the Albany Medical Center Institutional
Review Board Protocol.

620

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

Cell transfection
The primary mouse astrocytes were placed in 24
well plates for 7–10 days, changing the media every
3 days, and then transfected with the above mitochondrial DNA using 0.4 ␮g per well using Lifectamine
2000 according to the manufacturer (Invitrogen).
Poly dAdT (deoxyadenylic-deoxythymidylic; average size 1220 bases) DNA (Invivogen, San Diego,
CA) was transfected in parallel as a positive control. An initial study was carried out to determine
the ideal concentration of Lipofectamine 2000, and
found to be 2.5 ␮l per 100 ␮l MEM. Under these
conditions, 35% of cells were successfully transfected as assessed by transfection of green fluorescent
protein cDNA. For IL1␤ analyses, cells were first
primed for 5 h with 200 ng/ml E. coli LPS prior to
transfection. At this time, the cultures were aspirated, rinsed, and replaced with the same whole
culture media minus antibiotic just before transfection.
Cytokine analysis
Twenty hours after transfection, cell medias were
collected and cytokines analyzed by the Center for
Immunology and Microbial Disease Immunology Core
facility using the Cytometric Bead Array Flex Sets
for IL-6, monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1),
tumor necrosis factor-␣ (TNF␣), and IL1␤ according
to the manufacturer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA).
Cytokine levels from this assay were quantified by
interpolation from a standard curve for each cytokine
and expressed as pg per ml.
Southern blot analysis
Mitochondrial, CSF, and plasma DNAs were electrophoresed through a 1% agarose gel, then transferred
to nylon membrane and hybridized to the entire
mitochondrial genome (clone pAM1) labeled with
digoxigenin according to the manufacturer (Roche,
Indianapolis, IN). A final stringency wash of 0.5X SSC
and 0.1% SDS at 65◦ C was used. Final signals were
obtained by exposing to film, and quantified using the
ImageJ program.
Statistics
Data is expressed as the mean ± SEM. For cytokine
comparisons, the effect of the DNA transfection as
compared with mock was determined using a one-

sample T-test. Statistical significance was concluded
when p ≤ 0.05 for any comparison.
RESULTS
Generation of oxidant-initiated degraded
mitochondria DNA from HA-1 hamster ﬁbroblasts
We have carried out many of our oxidative stress
studies using an adaptive response cell culture model
of HA-1 cells and hydrogen peroxide [12–15, 38,
39], a cell system initially established by Spitz
et al. [40]. Among other things, this model is useful
for investigating the mechanistic role that oxidative
stress plays in various pathological states. Our previous
studies included demonstrating that DeMPs are selectively produced in these HA-1 hamster fibroblasts at
concentrations of hydrogen peroxide where no cytoplasmic mRNA or nuclear genomic DNA degradation
was observed [12–15]. For the present studies, we
first repeated our previous DeMP DNA analysis using
newly modified conditions to see if they repeated.
These modifications included the use of QiaAmp
nucleic acid binding resin to generate a purer preparation of DNA for subsequent transfection studies,
and the use of a non-radioactive digoxigenin-tagged
mitochondrial DNA probe. As shown in Fig. 1A, our
modified conditions still produced results essentially
identical to those previously published using a bolus
of hydrogen peroxide [13, 14]; that is, the generation
of significantly degraded mitochondrial DNA and the
loss of the mature bands 3 h after initiation of hydrogen
peroxide exposure (note: usually, two slow migrating
bands are observed in DNA from unstressed cells, possibly representing supercoiled and relaxed forms of the
circular mitochondrial genome).
In addition, studies were carried out to assess the
effect of steady state hydrogen peroxide generation on
mitochondrial DNA using glucose oxidase plus glucose (already present in the culture media). After initial
titration, 7 and 20 mU/ml concentrations of glucose
oxidase were selected for further study to determine
the levels of hydrogen peroxide generated. As shown
in Fig. 1B, sustainable hydrogen peroxide levels were
generated at both glucose oxidase concentrations starting at 20 min through 5 h. Based on these results, we
selected the 7 mU/ml glucose oxidase concentration,
which generated 16 ␮M steady state hydrogen peroxide at 20 min and 1 h, and 15 ␮M at 5 h, as our
test condition. Here, the cells were exposed to this
level of glucose oxidase-generated hydrogen peroxide for 5 h. As shown in Fig. 1A right lane, significant

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

621

Fig. 2. The effects of hydrogen peroxide on the degradation of mitochondrial genomic DNA over time. HA-1 cells were exposed to
various concentrations of hydrogen peroxide or solvent alone (control) as indicated for 2 h, 1 h, or 20 min, and at the appropriate
time points, cells removed from the incubator, spun, and homogenized. Mitochondria were then isolated by sequential centrifugation
and mitochondrial genomic DNA extracted, electrophoresed, transferred, and the Southern blot hybridized to the entire mitochondrial
pAM1 genome labeled with digoxigenin as a probe.

Fig. 1. Generation of oxidant-initiated degraded mitochondria DNA
from HA-1 hamster fibroblasts. A) HA-1 cells were exposed to 0 and
350 ␮M hydrogen peroxide (HP) for 3 h, or 7 mU/ml of glucose oxidase for 5 h (16 ␮M steady state hydrogen peroxide), and at these
times, cells removed from the incubator, spun and homogenized.
Mitochondria were then isolated by sequential centrifugation, mitochondrial genomic DNA extracted and electrophoresed, transferred,
and the Southern blot hybridized to the entire mitochondrial pAM1
genome labeled with digoxigenin as a probe. GO, glucose oxidase.
B) Time course for the generation of hydrogen peroxide by 7 and
20 mU/ml glucose oxidase.

mitochondrial DNA degradation was observed here,
and very similar to that observed for a 3 h bolus of
350 ␮M hydrogen peroxide (Fig. 1A, middle lane).
DeMP DNA is produced as early as 20 minutes
following hydrogen peroxide exposure of HA-1
hamster ﬁbroblasts
As shown above and previously reported under
somewhat different conditions [13, 14], DeMP DNA
can be generated in hamster HA-1 cells following 3 h
of hydrogen peroxide exposure. We next considered
whether DeMPs can be produced at earlier time points,
since we previously showed that DeMP RNA is pro-

duced as early as 8–20 min following peroxide [12]. To
determine how early DeMP DNA can be produced in
cells, we exposed separate HA-1 cell cultures to peroxide for 2 h,1 h, and 20 min. As shown in Fig. 2, accelerated mitochondrial DNA degradation was observed
as early as 20 min at both 150 and 350 ␮M hydrogen
peroxide, with greater degradation at 1 and 2 h.
Interestingly, the degradation of mitochondrial DNA
as early as 20 min was similar to what we previously
observed for RNA [12], suggesting that stress leads to a
rapid and concomitant production of both DeMP DNA
and RNA that may then act as danger signal alarmins.
Modest mitochondrial DNA oxidation is observed
following hydrogen peroxide exposure of HA-1
hamster ﬁbroblasts
To determine whether the observed mitochondrial
DNA degradation is associated with oxidation, we
assessed oxidation status using an antibody specific
for oxidized guanine. This study was also valuable in
better characterizing the nature of transfected DNA
used for subsequent proinflammatory cytokine studies. Here, mitochondrial-enriched DNA from control
and 2 h hydrogen peroxide-treated HA-1 cell cultures (using a 350 ␮M bolus) were compared by dot
blot analysis. A 6.1-fold increase in oxidized guanine
residues was observed in the enriched mitochondrial
DNA from hydrogen peroxide-treated samples as compared with control (Fig. 3). Thus, the DNA used for
subsequent proinflammatory cytokine studies (Figs. 4
and 5) was both degraded and modestly oxidized.

622

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

A

Relative oxoG levels

B 8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Control

Peroxide

Fig. 3. The effects of hydrogen peroxide exposure on mitochondrial DNA oxidation status. HA-1 cells were exposed to solvent
only (control) or 350 ␮M of hydrogen peroxide for 2 h, cells collected, and mitochondrial DNA extracted as described above. These
DNAs were then dot blotted to nylon membrane, UV-irradiated, and
hybridized with antibody specific to oxidized guanine (oxoG). A)
Representative dot blot. B) Plotted values. Values represent means
(n = 3) ± SEM, with the amount of oxidized mitochondrial DNA
from control cultures normalized to 1.0. * Significant difference
between the oxidation state of mitochondrial DNA from control versus hydrogen peroxide-treated cultures using a one-sample T-test at
p < 0.05.

DeMP DNA induces a strong proinﬂammatory
cytokine response in astrocytes
The ability of degraded mitochondrial DNA to act
as an alarmin and elicit a proinflammatory response
in astrocytes was assessed using transfection. Based
on the above Fig. 2 results, we choose to used DeMP
DNA from mitochondria obtained from cells treated
for 2 h with 350 ␮M hydrogen peroxide for transfections, as this material was thoroughly degraded and
of intermediate size (average 2500 bases) compared
with DNA degraded with the higher 800 ␮M hydrogen peroxide concentration. Media collected 20 h later
was then analyzed for levels of the released proinflammatory cytokines MCP-1, TNF␣, and IL-6. Media
from mock transfected cells was used as a control, while the common positive control Poly dAdT
was also employed. As shown in Fig. 4, a strong
proinflammatory response was observed in the cultured astrocytes. Specifically, degraded mitochondrial
DNA induced MCP-1 levels 11.2-fold, and TNF␣
8.4-fold, per the 0.4 ␮g of transfected DNA used for
each culture well (Fig. 4A). These values actually
exceeded that of the positive control dAdT DNA. The
effect of the degraded mitochondrial DNA on IL-6
was especially dramatic (95-fold induction; Fig. 4B).

Fig. 4. DeMP DNA induces a strong proinflammatory cytokine
response in astrocytes. DeMP DNA and control dAdT was transfected into mouse primary astrocytes and media collected 20 h
later. Samples were then analyzed for MCP-1, TNF␣, and IL-6
using the Cytometric Bead Array Flex Sets. Mock, no DNA mock
transfected sample. Mock transfection values were normalized to
1.0. Values represent means (n = 4) ± SEM. * Significant difference
between Mock and DNA transfected using a one-sample T-test at
p < 0.05.

Fig. 5. DeMP DNA induces the inflammasome product IL1␤ in
astrocytes. DeMP DNA and control dAdT were transfected into
mouse primary astrocytes after priming 5 h with 200 ng/ml LPS, and
media collected 20 h later. Samples were then analyzed for IL1␤
using the Cytometric Bead Array Flex Set. Mock, no DNA mock
transfected sample. Mock transfection values were normalized to
1.0. Values represent means (n = 3) ± SEM. * Significant difference
between Mock and DNA transfected using a one-sample T-test at
p < 0.05.

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

Thus, DeMP DNA induces a strong proinflammatory
cytokine response in cultured mouse primary astrocytes.
DeMP DNA also induces the inﬂammasome
product IL1β in astrocytes
The inflammasone is a critical inflammatory
response complex that mediates the production of IL1␤
and IL18 in immune cell types. Its presence and activity in other type cells including astrocytes is not well
characterized. The above transfection experiment was
therefore carried out and collected media analyzed
for IL1␤. For these studies, the astrocytes were first
primed with 200 ng/ml LPS prior to transfection as
described for other inflammasome studies [30, 32].
As shown in Fig. 5, the DeMP DNA significantly
induced IL1␤ (7.2-fold). These results indicate that
DeMP DNA can induce an inflammasome-mediated
proinflammatory response. Combined with the Fig. 2
studies, to our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that astrocytes are capable of proinflammatory
cytokine induction and inflammasome activation by
any form of mitochondrial DNA.
DeMP DNA is detectable in human CSF
and plasma
To determine whether degraded mitochondrial DNA
is released into and present in brain fluid and blood,
human CSF and plasma DNA was extracted and column purified. These DNAs were then electrophoresed,
transferred to membrane, and the Southern blots

Fig. 6. DeMP DNA is detectable in human CSF and plasma.
Human CSF and plasma were centrifuged, and the supernatant
DNAs extracted and column purified. These DNAs were then electrophoresed, transferred to membrane, and the Southern blots probed
with digoxigenin-tagged whole mitochondrial genome DNA.

623

probed with digoxigenin-tagged whole mitochondrial
genome DNA. As shown in Fig. 6, detectable DeMP
DNA was present in CSF and plasma, and present in a
moderately degraded state using Fig. 1 as a guide (note:
an interesting but as yet unclear variability in the degree
of degradation between the two human plasma donors
was observed). Thus, human CSF and blood plasma
contain detectable DeMP signal.

DISCUSSION
Our present studies indicate that DeMP DNA, generated in a model of oxidative stress, is strongly
immunogenic in astrocytes. These results provide
new insights on a number of levels. For one, they
demonstrate that a pathophysiologically relevant form
of mitochondrial DNA (degraded and oxidized) can
elicit a proinflammatory cytokine induction. As previously mentioned, other studies have demonstrated that
mitochondrial DNA is able to stimulate induction of
proinflammatory cytokines in immune cells, and that
mitochondrial DNA can be detected in blood plasma.
However, since PCR amplification has been used to
assess this mitochondrial DNA amount, its actual structural state has never been assessed. In fact, these
reports read as if it is assumed that released, proinflammatory mitochondrial DNA is the intact genome.
This is unlikely since intact mitochondrial DNA is
large and unlikely to readily pass through even semicompromised mitochondria. Furthermore, we show
here that mitochondrial DNA is present in CSF, and in a
moderately degraded state. Finally, we also show that
DeMPs are produced in HA-1 hamster fibroblasts in
response to hydrogen peroxide exposure. This model
mimics pathological states in that it is both a stress,
and an oxidative one, and pathological states have often
been associated with elevated ROS levels [1, 3, 5, 6]. In
fact, hydrogen peroxide levels have been estimated as
high as 100 ␮M (steady state) for certain pathological
stress conditions including brain ischemia [41–44].
Our results also demonstrate, for the first time, that
DeMPs can induce inflammasome activity. Inflammasome activity is a major contributor to inflammation
and known to be activated by microbial and mitochondrial DNAs, in turn leading to the specific elevation
and activation of IL-1 and IL-18 [19, 23, 29, 30, 32].
Our results, for the first time, also demonstrate that
pathophysiologically-relevant DeMPs elicit a proinflammatory cytokine induction in a brain cell type
(astrocytes). This induction of astrocyte proinflammatory cytokines has particular potential relevance in

624

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

Fig. 7. Proposed model of DeMP release and signaling. During stress and the development of disease states, elevated ROS levels occur in cells
and tissue. This elevated ROS oxidizes and damages cellular contents (in part due to elevated calcium levels) leading to compromised integrity
of cell membranes including mitochondria. Additionally, as we have observed, degraded mitochondrial DNA and RNA is generated. These
DeMPs then leak out into the cytoplasm and extracellular circulation. In the cytoplasm, they elevate proinflammatory cytokines which are then
secreted, activating immune cells and inducing an overall organismal immune response that leads to inflammation. Circulating DeMPs may also
exacerbate this inflammation state by externally triggering additional proinflammatory cytokine expression in immune and cytokine-producing
cells.

neurodegenerative diseases as discussed below. As part
of this, these results reveal, also for the first time, that
astrocytes are capable of inflammasome activation by
DeMPs.
Additionally, our results indicate that DeMPs are
detectable in CSF and plasma, suggesting the importance of this structural form in mitochondrial DNA
DAMP activity, and also demonstrating that cells and
tissue are able to release this material. An elevation in
CSF and plasma DeMPs may exist under pathological
conditions, and future studies are planned to assess this
such as by examining DeMP levels in CSF and plasma
from Alzheimer’s disease (AD) versus normal individuals. Other future studies will determine whether
extracellular DeMPs can elicit a significant proinflammatory response in target cells (i.e., in the absence of
transfection), and the effect of toll like- and DNAreceptor knockout mutants on this response to better
assess the involved mechanisms behind DeMP pathobiology. Finally, our results demonstrate that hydrogen
peroxide stimulates a parallel and early stage degradation of mitochondrial DNA and RNA, suggesting their
role as early stage oxidative stress alarmins. We now

also believe that our earlier studies going back to the
late 1990 s represent some of the earliest reports of
DAMPs, now that mitochondrial DNA has officially
been found to be a DAMP family member, and since we
have demonstrated that degraded mitochondrial DNA
and RNA production is associated with growth arrest,
apoptosis and adaptive response (then) and proinflammatory cytokine production (present studies).
For hydrogen peroxide from a bolus or glucose oxidase catalysis, or in vivo pathological pro-oxidant state
formation from increased mitochondrial and NADPH
ROS generation combined with reduced antioxidant
status, the upstream signaling mechanisms would presumably be oxidative in nature leading to eventual
DeMP generation. At the cell membrane, an oxidation
of protein and lipids with subsequent lipid peroxide
and aldehyde formation is likely and, in combination with permeabilized hydrogen peroxide, would
lead to a plethora of cellular alterations contributing to DeMP formation. This would include released
transition metals, altered protein signaling pathways
(such as activation of redox-responsive MAP kinases),
and the known release and intracellular elevation of

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

625

Fig. 8. Proposed model of DeMP involvement in Alzheimer’s disease. In AD, elevated ROS occurs in astrocytes and microglia well before,
perhaps decades before, the full-blown appearance of amyloid plaques and tau tangles. As outlined in Fig. 7, this eventually leads to DeMP
release, then proinflammatory cytokine production, then brain inflammation and an even greater pro-oxidant state. This early and aberrant
appearance of oxidative stress and inflammation eventually leads to neuronal death, perhaps in part by potentiating plaque and tangle formation.

free intracellular calcium from disrupted endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondrial, and plasma membranes
[44]. We hypothesize that this elevated calcium activates nuclease(s) that target DNA and contributes to
the observed DeMP generation [13]. Additionally,
we observe a 6.1-fold increase in oxidized guanine
residues in mitochondrial-enriched DNA from hydrogen peroxide-treated samples as compared with control
(note: it is theoretically possible that there is some
contaminant nuclear DNA in this preparation, so
we refer to this DNA as “mitochondrial-enriched”).
This increased oxidation is likely a minimal value,
since greater oxidation may have occurred that was
repaired during incubation. Thus, elevated ROS are
also reaching the mitochondrial DNA in response to
external hydrogen peroxide exposure. The main oxidizing species thought to be involved in DNA oxidation
is hydroxyl radical [44], likely from the Fenton reaction
at DNA in the presence of reduced transition metals
that may also be elevated from the initial oxidative
stress. Elevated superoxide from disrupted electron
transport and NADPH activation, alkoxyl radicals, and
lipid peroxyl radicals may also contribute, as well as
toxic lipid peroxidation byproducts such as aldehydes
that may promote mitochondrial DNA degradation.
In our HA-1 oxidative model, we observed DeMP
DNA and RNA generation as reported here and pre-

viously [12–15]. Furthermore, we now demonstrate
that the oxidant-initiated degraded form of DNA elicits
a strong proinflammatory cytokine response in astrocytes. Combined, these results support a model in
which the elevated ROS known to be associated with
many pathological states triggers the generation of
DeMPS, which are then released from ROS compromised/damaged mitochondria to the cytoplasm and
extracellular circulation. This is further supported by
the known release of mitochondrial DNA to the circulation in humans, and its elevation in pathological
states [33–36]. Once outside of the mitochondria, these
DeMPs are able to act as alarmins, inducing cytokine
production in the case of cytokine producing cells
including astrocytes, as well as other actions such as
growth arrest, for which we previously demonstrated
an association [14]. This DeMP effect may even be
beneficial in some cases, as a protective “adaptive
response” is also associated with DeMP formation
as we have reported [12]. Based on our results and
the above considerations, we propose two models as
shown in Figs. 7 and 8. In the first, a general one,
the effect of elevated ROS in pathological states is
shown to trigger mitochondrial DNA and RNA degradation, which are then released to the cytoplasm and
extracellular milieu and circulation through leaky compromised mitochondrial membranes. Here, they act as

626

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

alarmin danger signalers, and their effect includes the
induction of proinflammatory cytokines in cytokine
producing cell types, triggering an organismal immune
response leading to inflammation. In the second, we
consider the potential contribution of DeMPs to neurodegeneration using AD as a prime example based
on our new astrocyte results. AD was discovered over
100 years ago but unfortunately, there is nothing close
to a cure for this sad, debilitating and costly disease. While the overwhelming focus of AD research
has been senile amyloid plaques and tau tangles, the
lack of progress toward a cure has led an increasing
number of researchers to consider the possibility that
there are other bases for the disease. More recently,
a so-called “Alternate Hypothesis” has been considered [45]. It states that although amyloid plaques are
involved in the disease, they are not the initiating
event and may be, in some cases, perhaps even be
a protective brain response. We propose that DeMPs
are a newly identified major contributor to AD. We
base this claim on four things: 1) as we have shown,
DeMPs can elicit a strong proinflammatory response in
astrocytes; 2) inflammation, which would be increased
by the DeMP elevated release of proinflammatory
cytokines by astrocytes, is an early stage predictor
of AD, where early and sometimes dramatic activation of cytokine overexpression occurs in astrocytes
and microglia sometimes decades before pathological changes consistent with a diagnosis of AD are
apparent [45–48]; 3) similar to inflammation, oxidative stress is also an early stage in AD [45, 48, 49], and
our model uses ROS as a source to produce oxidized
degraded mitochondrial polynucleotide alarmins; and
4) mitochondrial DNA already has a strong pathological connection, as highly elevated plasma levels have
been associated with multiple diseases and disorders
including brain [33–36].
In summary, we have extended previous studies and
determined that oxidant-initiated DeMPs representing
a likely pathophysiologically and in vivo relevant structural form is able to stimulate a strong proinflammatory
cytokine induction of IL-6, MCP-1, and TNF␣; that
this proinflammatory effect also includes activation
of inflammasome IL1␤; that CSF and blood plasma
contains detectable DeMP signal; and that early stage
degradation of mitochondrial DNAs (and RNAs) in
HA-1 hamster cells occurs following hydrogen peroxide exposure, suggesting their role as early stage
alarmin signalers. We also show, for the first time, that
this proinflammatory DeMP effect occurs in a brain
cell type (astrocytes). Combined, these results provide
new insights into the role and action of mitochon-

drial polynucleotides as DAMPs, and suggest a role
for DeMPs in AD and other neurodegenerative and
mitochondrial-based diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Gary Schools,
Dr. Maninjay Atianand, Dr. Douglas Spitz, Jane
Noblett, Dr. Earl Zimmerman, Dr. Amber Mitchell,
Dr. Jonathan Harton, Dr. Natasha Abramova Lowry,
Yili Lin, and Dr. Tim Sellati for reagents, samples, and
helpful suggestions. These studies were supported in
part by grants from the NIH STIRT grant program and
The Community Foundation for the Capital Region’s
Bender Scientific Fund.
Authors’ disclosures available online (http://www.jalz.com/disclosures/view.php?id=1192).
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Cerutti PA (1985) Prooxidant states and tumor promotion.
Science 227, 375-381.
Sies H (1991) Oxidative stress: From basic research to clinical
application. Am J Med 91, 31S-38S.
Floyd RA (1990) Role of oxygen free radicals in carcinogenesis and brain ischemia. FASEB J 4, 2587-2597.
Glauert HP, Hennig B, Chow HS (1990) Induction of peroxisomal enzymes in cultured porcine endothelial cells by
the hypolipodemic drug cibrofibrate. J Biochem Tox 5, 115118.
Angermuller S, Bruder G, Volkl A, Wesch H, Fahimi HD
(1987) Localization of xanthine oxidase in crystalline cores
of peroxisomes. A cytochemical and biochemical study. Eur
J Cell Biol 45, 137-144.
Farber JL, Kyle ME, Coleman JB (1990) Mechanisms of cell
injury by activated oxygen species. Lab Invest 62, 670-679.
Zhang Y, Marcillat O. Giulivi C, Ernster L, Davies KJ (1990)
The oxidative inactivation of mitochondrial electron transport
chain components and ATPase. J Biol Chem 265, 1633016336.
Bindoli A (1988) Lipid peroxidation in mitochondria. Free
Rad Biol Med 5, 247-261.
Davies KJ (1990) J. Protein oxidation and proteolytic degradation. General aspects and relationship to cataract formation.
Adv Exp Med Biol 264, 503-511.
Bandy B, Davison AJ (1990) J. Mitochondrial mutations may
increase oxidative stress: Implications for carcinogenesis and
aging? Free Radic Biol Med 8, 523-539.
Wallace S (1988) AP endonucleases and DNA glycosylases
that recognize oxidative DNA damage. Env Mol Mutag 12,
431-477.
Crawford DR, Wang Y, Schools GP, Kochheiser J, Davies KJA
(1997) Down-regulation of mammalian mitochondrial RNAs
during oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med 22, 551-559.
Crawford DR, Abramova N, Davies KJA (1998) Oxidative stress causes a general. calcium-dependent degradation
of mitochondrial polynucleotides. Free Radic Biol Med 25,
1106-1111.
Abramova NE, Davies KJA, Crawford DR (2000) Polynucleotide degradation during early stage response to oxidative

A. Mathew et al. / DeMPs, a Newly Identiﬁed DAMP in Astrocytes

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]
[30]

[31]

[32]

stress is specific to mitochondria. Free Radic Biol Med 28,
281-288.
Crawford DR, Lauzon RJ, Wang Y, Mazurkiewicz JE, Davies
KJA (1997) 16S mitochondrial ribosomal RNA degradation
is associated with apoptosis. Free Radic Biol Med 22, 12951300.
Anna Rubartelli A, Lotze MT (2007) Inside, outside, upside down: Damage-associated molecular-pattern
molecules (DAMPs) and redox. Trends Immunol 28, 429-436.
Bianchi ME (2007) DAMPs, PAMPs and alarmins: All we
need to know about danger. J Leukocyte Biol 81, 1-5.
Zhang Q, Raoof M, Chen Y, Sumi Y, Sursal T, Junger W, Brohi
K, Itagaki K, Hauser CJ (2010) Circulating mitochondrial
DAMPs cause inflammatory responses to injury. Nature 464,
104-107.
Krysko DV, Agostinis P, Krysko O, Garg AD, Bachert C,
Lambrecht BN, Vandenabeele P (2011) Emerging role of
damage-associated molecular patterns derived from mitochondria in inflammation. Trends Immunol 32, 157-164.
Carta S, Castellani P, Delfino L, Tassi S, Venè R, Rubartelli A
(2009) DAMPs and inflammatory processes: The role of redox
in the different outcomes. J Leukoc Biol 86, 549-555.
Wu MH, Zhang P, Huang X (2010) Toll-like receptors in
innate immunity and infectious diseases. Front Med China
4, 385-393.
West AP, Shadel GS, Ghosh S (2011) Mitochondria in innate
immune responses. Nat Rev Immunol 11, 389-402.
Maher JJ (2009) DAMPs ramp up drug toxicity. J Clin Invest
119, 246-249.
Kumar H, Kawai T, Akira S (2011) Pathogen recognition by
the innate immune system. Int Rev Immunol 30, 16-34.
Yi AK, Chace JH, Cowdery JS, Krieg AM (2011) IFN-gamma
promotes IL-6 and IgM secretion in response to CpG motifs
in bacterial DNA and oligodeoxynucleotides. J Immunol 156,
558-564.
McCoy SL, Kurtz SE, Hausman FA, Trune DR, Bennett RM,
Hefeneider SH (2004) Activation of RAW264.7 macrophages
by bacterial DNA and lipopolysaccharide increases cell surface DNA binding and internalization. J Biol Chem 279,
17217-17223.
Collins LV, Hajizadeh S, Holme E, Jonsson I-M, Tarkowski A
(2004) Endogenously oxidized mitochondrial DNA induces
in vivo and in vitro inflammatory responses. J Leukoc Biol 75,
995-1000.
Zhang Q, Itagaki K, Hauser CJ (2010) Mitochondrial DNA
is released by shock and activates neutrophils via p38 MAP
kinase. Shock 34, 55-59.
Sharma S, Fitzgerald KA (2011) Innate immune sensing of
DNA. PLoS Pathog 7, 1-3.
Nakahira K, Haspel JA, Rathinam VA, Lee SJ, Dolinay T,
Lam HC, Englert JA, Rabinovitch M, Cernadas M, Kim
HP, Fitzgerald KA, Ryter SW, Choi AM (2011) Autophagy
proteins regulate innate immune responses by inhibiting
the release of mitochondrial DNA mediated by the NALP3
inflammasome. Nat Immunol 12, 222-230.
Barber GN (2011) Innate immune DNA sensing pathways:
STING, AIMII and the regulation of interferon production
and inflammatory responses. Curr Opin Immunol 23, 10-20.
Rathinam VA, Jiang Z, Waggoner SN, Sharma S, Cole LE,
Waggoner L, Vanaja SK, Monks BG, Ganesan S, Latz E,
Hornung V, Vogel SN, Szomolanyi-Tsuda E, Fitzgerald KA
(2010) The AIM2 inflammasome is essential for host-defense
against cytosolic bacteria and DNA viruses. Nat Immunol 11,
395-402.

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]
[42]

[43]

[44]
[45]

[46]
[47]

[48]

[49]

627

Swarup V, Rajeswari MR (2007) Circulating (cell-free)
nucleic acids – A promising, non-invasive tool for early
detection of several human diseases. FEBS Lett 581, 795799.
Butt AN, Swaminathan R (2008) Overview of circulating
nucleic acids in plasma/serum. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1137, 236242.
Tsai NW, Lin TK, Chen SD, Chang WN, Wang HC, Yang
TM, Lin YJ, Jan CR, Huang CR, Liou CW, Lu CH (2011)
The value of serial plasma nuclear and mitochondrial DNA
levels in patients with acute ischemic stroke. Clin Chim Acta
412, 476-479.
Yoo J-H, Suhb B, Park TS, Shind M-G, Choie YD, Leef CH,
Choi JR (2010) Analysis of fluorescence in situ hybridization,
mtDNA quantification, and mtDNA sequence for the detection of early bladder cancer. Cancer Genet Cytogenetics 198,
107-117.
Kaech S, Banker G (2006) Culturing hippocampal neurons.
Nat Prot 1, 2406-2415.
Crawford DR, Edbauer-Nechamen CA, Lowry CV, Salmon
SL, Kim YK, Davies JMS, Davies KJA (1994) Assessing
gene-expression during oxidative stress. Meth Enzymol 234,
175-217.
Crawford DR, Schools GP, Salmon SL, Davies KJA (1996)
Hydrogen peroxide induces the expression of adapt15, a novel
RNA associated with polysomes in hamster HA-1 cells. Arch
Biochem Biophys 325, 256-264.
Spitz DR, Dewey WC, Li GC (1987) Hydrogen peroxide or
heat shock induces resistance to hydrogen peroxide in Chinese
hamster fibroblasts. J Cell Physiol 131, 364-373.
Halliwell B, Clement MV, Long LH (2000) Hydrogen peroxide in the human body. FEBS Lett 486, 10-13.
Coombes E, Jiang J, Chu X-P, Inoue K, Seeds J, Branigan D,
Simon RP, Xiong Z-G (2011) Pathophysiologically relevant
levels of hydrogen peroxide induce glutamate-independent
neurodegeneration that involves activation of transient receptor potential melastatin 7 channels. Antioxid Redox Signal 14,
1815-1827.
Hyslop PA, Zhang Z, Pearson DV, Phebus LA (1995) Measurement of striatal H2 O2 by microdialysis following global
forebrain ischemia and reperfusion in the rat: Correlation with
the cytotoxic potential of H2 O2 in vitro. Brain Res 671, 181186.
Halliwell B, Gutteridge JMC (2003) Free Radical in Biology
and Medicine, Oxford Science Publications, NY, NY.
Lee HG, Zhu X, Castellani RJ, Nunomura A, Perry G, Smith
MA (2007) Amyloid-beta in Alzheimer disease: The null versus the alternate hypotheses. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 321,
823-829.
Mrak RE, Griffin WS (2005) Glia and their cytokines in progression of neurodegeneration. Neurobiol Aging 26, 349-354.
Eikelenboom P, van Exel E, Hoozemans JJ, Veerhuis R,
Rozemuller AJ, van Gool WA (2010) Neuroinflammation an early event in both the history and pathogenesis of
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurodegener Dis 7, 38-41.
Galimberti D, Scarpini E (2011) Inflammation and oxidative
damage in Alzheimer’s disease: Friend or foe? Front Biosci
(Schol Ed) 3, 252-266.
Sultana R, Butterfield DA (2010) Role of oxidative stress in
the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. J Alzheimers Dis 19,
341-353.

