Neurologic Diseases (Including Ophthalmic and Auditory Diseases) I
macrophages to the therapeutic effects. Importantly, the degree of
therapeutic improvement was similar in the absence or presence of
GW2580 as demonstrated by similar changes in BAL turbidity, SPD, GM-CSF, and M-CSF (n=4-7/group; P>0.05; all comparisons).
Conclusions: Results demonstrate that GM-CSF but not M-CSF
contributes to the efficacy of PMT therapy that restores surfactant
homeostasis in mice with hPAP.
Funding: ATS, CCHMC, NIH UL1TR000077 (TS); NIH
R01HL085453, R21HL106134, R01HL118342 (BCT)

Neurologic Diseases (Including Ophthalmic and
Auditory Diseases) I
13.
Post-Symptomatic Intrathecal Infusion
of AAV1 Results in Reversal of Storage Lesions
Throughout the Brain in the Cat Model of AlphaMannnosidosis Leading To Clinical Improvement

Sea Young Yoon,1 Jessica H. Bagel,2 Manoj Kumar,3 Patricia A.
O’Donnell,2 Harish Poptani,3 Charles H. Vite,2 John H. Wolfe.1,2,4
1
Research Institute of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia; 2W.F. Goodman Center for Comparative Medical
Genetics, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia; 3Departments of Radiology, Perelman
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia;
4
Departments of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are debilitating neurometabolic
disorders for which long-term effective therapies have not been
developed for most. A critical barrier to progress in the successful
treatment of LSDs is an approach that will allow sustained delivery
of the missing lysosomal enzyme to the brain in a quantity sufficient
to prevent neuropathology. Intrathecal injection of AAVs has been
shown to mediate transduction of neuronal and glial cells in the brain
and spinal cord of large animals, and it has recently been reported
that AAV9 infusion into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of MPS I cats
improves histopathological lesions, but no evidence of improvement
in clinical signs were reported. We tested the efficacy of postsymptomatic intrathecal delivery of AAV1 to the brain via the cisterna
magna in alpha-mannosidosis (AMD) affected cats. Lysosomal
alpha-mannosidase (LAMAN) activity in the CSF was consistently
above untreated AMD cat control values. The lifespan of the treated
cats was significantly extended compared to untreated cats and the
onset of clinical symptoms were delayed and reduced in severity.
We have previously shown that magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(MRS) detects a large peak of accumulated oligosaccharides in the
AMD brain of live animals, and it was significantly decreased in the
treated cat brains. Post-mortem histopathology showed resolution
of lysosomal storage lesions in most regions of the brain, including
the cerebral cortex, caudate nucleus, hippocampus, cerebellum and
choroid plexus, and LAMAN enzymatic activity was above levels
of untreated tissues. Our results demonstrate that a single intrathecal
injection of AAV1 expressing feline alpha-mannosidase gene
(fMANB) into the CSF was able to mediate widespread neuronal
transduction of the brain and meaningful clinical improvement. Thus,
intrathecal gene delivery by AAV1 appears to be a viable strategy for
a long lasting treatment for the whole brain in AMD and, based on
the widespread gene distribution, should be applicable to many of the
neurotropic LSDs as well as other neurogenetic disorders.

S6

14.
Next Generation AAV Vectors for Limiting
Systemic Leakage and Improving Safety Following
CNS Administration

Giridhar Murlidharan,1,2 Lavanya Rao,2 Dan Wang,3 Travis
Corriher,2 Kyung Seok-Oh,2 Guangping Gao,3 R. Jude Samulski,2
Alice F. Tarantal,4 Aravind Asokan.1,2
1
Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina-Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; 2Gene Therapy Center, University of North
Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; 3Gene Therapy Center,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA;
4
California National Primate Research Center, University of
California-Davis, Davis, CA.

Intracranial or intrathecal administration of certain AAV vectors
for CNS gene transfer is accompanied with systemic leakage into offtarget organs such as the liver and spleen. Both preclinical and clinical
studies have highlighted potential concerns related to high vector
dose-related immunotoxicity and more recently, hepatic genotoxicity
in mouse models. In order to address these potential safety issues
and reduce the effective dose required to achieve efficient transgene
expression in the CNS, we have rationally engineered next generation
AAV vectors that show robust CNS spread and efficient transduction,
while demonstrating minimal leakage into the systemic circulation.
Direct CNS administration or intrathecal infusion of AAV9 results
in highly efficient gene expression in neuronal and glial cellular
populations in neonatal and adult mice in vivo. However, AAV9
vectors are also disseminated into the blood circulation accompanied
by broad vector biodistribution and reporter gene expression in the
heart, liver, spleen and kidney. CNS-to-liver and CNS-to-spleen ratios
of vector genome copy numbers ranging from 0.3 to 1 were observed.
A prototype, engineered AAV strain demonstrated similar potential for
spread and high transduction efficiency in neonatal and adult mice.
However, transgene expression was primarily restricted to neurons
and virtually no leakage into systemic organs was observed regardless
of CNS injection route. Preliminary studies in rhesus macaques
also confirm the ability of the engineered AAV strain to spread and
globally transduce the primate brain. Additional biodistribution
data from rodent and primate models is forthcoming. These studies
provide a roadmap for addressing clinical gene therapy challenges
through continued vector development and confirm that natural AAV
isolates are excellent platforms for building next generation vectors
with robust transduction efficiency and improved safety profiles.

15.
Development of Intrathecal scAAV9 Gene
Therapy for Giant Axonal Neuropathy

Rachel M. Bailey,1 Diane Armao,2 Sahana Nagabhushan Kalburgi,1
Steven J. Gray.1,3
1
Gene Therapy Center, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill; 2Dept. of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill; 3Dept. of Ophthalmology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC.
Giant axonal neuropathy (GAN) is a rare pediatric neurodegenerative
disorder characterized by progressive sensory and motor neuropathy
that presents as early as 3 years of age and with ultimate mortality
during the second or third decade of life. GAN is caused by
autosomal recessive loss-of-function mutations in the GAN gene
that encodes the gigaxonin protein. Gigaxonin plays a role in the
organization/degradation of intermediate filaments (IFs) and a
pathological hallmark of GAN is large axonal swellings filled with
disorganized aggregates of IFs. While GAN is primarily described
as a peripheral neuropathy, diffuse pathology from disorganized IFs
is found throughout the nervous system and other organ systems.
An NIH-sponsored Phase I study is underway to test the safety of
intrathecal (IT) administration of scAAV9/JeT-GAN to treat the most
Molecular Therapy Volume 23, Supplement 1, May 2015
Copyright © The American Society of Gene & Cell Therapy

