Parkinson’s Disease Clinic and Research Center
University of California, San Francisco
505 Parnassus Ave., Rm. 795-M, Box 0114
San Francisco, CA 94143-0114
(415) 476-9276
http://pdcenter.neurology.ucsf.edu

Gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease
Parkinson's disease is characterized by loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia
nigra. The loss of these neurons results in a change in the balance of expiratory and inhibitory
pathways in the brain, and these pathways in turn affect movement control. Medication therapies,
and in particular dopamine replacement therapies were developed in the late 1960s and remain
the mainstay of therapy. More recently, surgical treatments (pallidotomy or deep brain
stimulation of selected targets in the brain) have been developed to improve motor function by
normalizing increased brain cell activity due the loss of dopamine releasing cells which occurs as
a consequence of reduced dopamine release.
People with Parkinson's disease generally respond well to medication for a number of
years. However with long-term treatment, the response to medication—especially to levodopa—
may fluctuate. The most common “motor fluctuation” is called wearing off. Wearing off may
develop years after beginning treatment with a dopamine agonist or levodopa. It occurs when the
benefits of the prior dose are beginning to wane and is often appreciated as recurrence of tremor
or slowness in the hour before the next dose of medication is taken. The other main motor
fluctuation is involuntary twisting turning movements called dyskinesias which typically occur
in the hour or so after taking dopaminergic therapies. Medications (insert link) and deep brain
stimulation (insert link) are described in other modules. In this module, the potential advantages
of gene therapy will be discussed.
Gene therapy has a number of potential advantages that may be useful in progressive
medical conditions. Conceptually, it is a means of making cells produce a protein that they
normally do not produce that might improve a particular condition. The technique inserts genes
that provide specific genetic instructions that cells use to produce a desired protein. The
treatments produce proteins that are involved in normal cellular processes and may therefore be
less likely to cause side effects. Moreover, gene therapy can be targeted to a specific location
where the treatment is needed, which also may limit possible side effects. Finally, gene therapy
does not rely on the placement of devices that may fail due to mechanical or electrical reasons. A
number of proteins have already been used for gene therapy for Parkinson's disease. The choice
depends on the treatment strategy. For example one strategy is to improve the delivery of
dopamine to the relevant brain regions in Parkinson's disease. Other strategies have tried to
provide growth factor support to brain regions with the expectation that this might help damaged
nerve cells to recover and thus slow Parkinson's disease progression or reverse it.

Gene therapy relies on transporting small pieces of genetic material, or DNA, into the
targeted brain cells. Because human bodies have developed a number of enzymes that
breakdown unprotected DNA, most gene therapies use some sort of “protective envelop”, called
a vector, to carry the genetic material and deliver the gene to targeted cells. The most common
vectors include adeno-associated virus type 2, lentivirus, adenovirus, and herpes simplex virus.
Only viruses that have lost her ability to reproduce themselves and do not cause disease are
selected as vectors for gene therapy. Adeno-associated virus type 2(AAV-2) has particular
advantages. It carries genetic material only to neurons (not to the other supporting cells of the
brain) and once within the brain it is particularly efficient in carrying the genetic material to the
neurons affected in Parkinson's disease. Most gene therapy studies in Parkinson's disease have
used AAV-2 as the vector. Lentiviruses have also been studied extensively. Because of their
larger capacity, lentivirus is the vector when more than one gene is used.
Once a gene and vector have been selected, the treatment must be administered to the
relevant area of the brain. The studies performed thus far have been directed to particular regions
of the basal ganglia. The basal ganglia are number of interconnected deep brain regions that are
involved in movement control. A major pathway connects the substantia nigra to the putamen
(where dopamine is normally released) and then to the globus pallidus directly or by way of the
subthalamic nucleus. To date, gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease has been administered by
drilling a hole in each side of the skull and then injecting the selected dose of the viral vector
(containing the gene) into the desired brain region (either putamen or subthalamic nucleus) using
image-guided surgical techniques. These treatments are performed either in a standard operating
room or in a specialized radiology suite. Recovery from these procedures is usually quite rapid,
with most patients being discharged home 1 or 2 days after gene therapy.
In the descriptions below, reference will be made to the clinical studies conducted thus
far in humans. Phase 1 studies refer to small studies, usually 10-15 patients at a single
institution. These studies are designed to determine the safety and possible benefit of a particular
treatment and no untreated comparison group is recruited. If a phase 1 study shows that a
treatment is well tolerated and provides some evidence of benefit, a phase 2 study may be
performed. Phase 2 studies are larger (typically 30-60 patients), are conducted at a number of
medical institutions, and a control or placebo group is included for comparison to the group
treated with the gene therapy. Humans in research studies often obtain substantial improvements
that are unrelated to the specific treatment they receive The improvement may be due to the
expectation of benefit from treatment. This phenomenon is called the placebo effect and can be
quite substantial in patients with Parkinson's disease. Therefore using a “control” or untreated
group is considered crucial in determining whether a treatment offers true benefit, beyond the
placebo effect. Because gene therapy involves surgical treatment, a simulated or “sham”
surgical procedure is necessary in gene therapy studies. These sham surgical procedures usually
involve drilling small holes in the skull but not injecting the brain with the gene therapy under
study. In the studies, investigators who perform subsequent evaluations of the patients are also
unaware of whether the patient underwent the gene therapy or the sham procedure. This is called
a double-blind study since neither the subject nor the investigator who performs the routine

visits knows the treatment status of the patient. Double-blind studies are considered fundamental
in determining whether a treatment offers a true benefit. If a study treatment shows safety and
benefit in a Phase 2 study, a Phase 3 study may then be performed. This study is similar to a
Phase 2 study but is larger study (usually involving hundreds of patients) and is designed to
confirm the treatment effectiveness, monitor side effects, and collect information that will allow
the treatment to be used safely. Information from a successful Phase 3 studies (along with other
information about the study treatment) is then used by the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) to determine whether a new treatment is approved for routine treatment of
a medical disorder.
Regarding therapeutic strategies, 3 approaches have been developed thus far. These are as
follows:
(1) The first approach is to increase dopamine production in specific regions of the
brain. One study using this approach approaches uses the gene for the enzyme
aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC). This enzyme converts levodopa into
dopamine, a neurotransmitter that is deficient in Parkinson's disease. Studies have
shown that AADC is gradually lost in Parkinson's disease. The progressive loss of
this enzyme is thought to contribute to the need to increase levodopa doses as time
goes on. The rationale for this approach is that if a greater amount of AADC is
present in the location where dopamine should be released, then a more reliable and
perhaps a more robust response to levodopa will occur. Moreover, it is possible that a
patient who no longer is obtaining a reliable benefit from levodopa therapy might
regain responsiveness to this treatment after gene therapy with AADC. Inherent in
this approach treatment is that the patient may alter the effect of his gene therapy by
adjusting his daily dose of levodopa, since the effect of this therapy depends on
continuing treatment with levodopa. A phase 1 study in which AADC was injected
into the putamen has been completed at 2 different doses. In the 10 patients treated,
clinical rating scales and diaries of motor function suggested benefit and specific
imaging studies provided evidence of successful gene therapy.
A variation on this strategy uses 3 genes that produce the enzymes AADC,
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and GTP-cyclohydrolase-1 (GCH-1). Together these 3
enzymes can generate dopamine independent of external levodopa. The advantage of
this approach is that it may be possible for the patient to discontinue treatment with
levodopa. Although this approach seems very attractive, there are concerns that its
benefits relies on producing precisely the right amount of dopamine. For example, too
high a dose of gene therapy might result in complications due to excessive production
of dopamine. The results of the study should be published in the near future.
(2) The second gene therapy strategy is to adjust or modulate the excitatory and
inhibitory pathways of the brain. The rationale of this approach is that the nerve
cells of the subthalamic nucleus are overactive and that release of an inhibitory
neurotransmitter in this brain region might normalize these cells. The gene for the
enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), which produces the inhibitory

neurotransmitter called GABA, has been examined in a phase 2 study in which 45
subjects were randomized to either bilateral treatment with GAD or a sham or
simulated surgical procedure. While both patient groups showed improvement at 6
months, the improvement was greater in the subjects who underwent GAD treatment.
Overall this study provided support for both the efficacy and safety of this approach.
(3) The third approach is using brain proteins, termed growth factors (because of their
role in brain development), that might protect against progression of Parkinson's
disease or possibly even reverse it by stimulating regrowth of injured nerve cells. A
number of growth factors have been identified over the years. These include glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and Neurturin which is similar to GDNF
and shares the ability to promote the survival of dopaminergic neurons. In models of
Parkinson's disease, GDNF and Neurturin have been shown to promote the survival
of dopaminergic neurons. Both a phase 1 and phase 2 study using Neurturin gene
therapy targeted to the putamen have been performed. In the phase 2 study, 38
patients were randomized to Neurturin gene therapy or to sham surgery.
Unfortunately, there was no significant difference in the main outcome measures at
12 months. While the lack of benefit in the main outcome measures was
disappointing, a subgroup of patients followed for 18 months was slightly better in
the Neurturin patient than the sham treatment group, suggesting that slightly longer
period of observations might be necessary to see a benefit with this gene therapy.
Because of this interesting result, a second phase 2 study is underway in which
Neurturin gene therapy is also targeted to the substantia nigra.

Treatment strategy

Gene(s)

Vector

Completed
studies

Increase dopamine

AADC

AAV-2

Phase 1

AADC, TH,
& GCH-1
Alter excitatory activity
GAD

Lentivirus
AAV-2

Phase 1 &2

Growth factors

GDNF

AAV-2

-

Neurturin

AAV-2

Phase 1 &2

Ongoing or
Enrolling
studies
Phase 1 to
start in 2013
Phase 1 & 2
in progress

Phase 1 to
start in 2012
Second
Phase 2 in
progress

Other gene therapy strategies are being considered. One such study includes using human
erythropoietin. This study in experimental animals showed protection against toxins that usually
damage dopaminergic cells. Other therapies are using insights provided by improved
understanding of genetic causes of Parkinson's disease. It is conceivable that, as our knowledge

of specific genetic defects causing Parkinson's disease improves, specific gene therapies could be
developed for each individual genetic defect.
Conclusion:
Limitations in the benefit of medical and the surgical treatments of Parkinson's disease
have stimulated efforts to develop new therapies. Gene therapy has distinct theoretical
advantages over conventional treatment for Parkinson's disease as it might preserve or restore
dopaminergic neurons through the use of growth factors or alternatively increase the availability
of enzymes required for dopamine synthesis. Over the past 10 years, 3 different strategies have
emerged and have been implemented in carefully designed human treatment protocols. To date,
these gene therapies appear to be safe and there is some evidence suggesting benefit. Ongoing
and planned phase 2 studies will identify the most promising therapies that will require further
evaluation in a phase 3 study. It is hoped that gene therapies will provide improved treatment
options for people with Parkinson's disease in the near future.

References:
Christine CW et al. Safety and tolerability of putaminal AADC gene therapy for Parkinson
disease. Neurology 2009; 73: 1662-1669.
Denyer R and Douglas MR . Gene therapy for Parkinson's disease. Parkinsons Dis 2012 in press.
LeWitt PA et al. AAV2-GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson's disease: a double-blind,
sham-surgery controlled, randomised trial. Lancet Neurol 2011; 10: 309-319.
Marks WJ et al. Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson's disease: a double-blind,
randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2010; 9: 1164-1172.
Witt J and Marks WJ. An update on gene therapy in Parkinson's disease. Curr Neurol Neurosci
Rep 2011; 11: 362-370.

