NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS

An Essay on the Shaking
Palsy
James Parkinson, Member of the Royal
College of Surgeons

PREFACE
The advantages which have been derived from the caution with which hypothetical statements are admitted,
are in no instance more obvious than in those sciences
which more particularly belong to the healing art. It
therefore is necessary, that some conciliatory explanation should be offered for the present publication: in
which, it is acknowledged, that mere conjecture takes
the place of experiment; and, that analogy is the substitute for anatomical examination, the only sure foundation for pathological knowledge.
When, however, the nature of the subject, and the circumstances under which it has been here taken up, are
considered, it is hoped that the offering of the following
pages to the attention of the medical public, will not be
severely censured. The disease, respecting which the
present inquiry is made, is of a nature highly afﬂictive.
Notwithstanding which, it has not yet obtained a place
in the classiﬁcation of nosologists; some have regarded
its characteristic symptoms as distinct and different diseases, and others have given its name to diseases differing essentially from it; whilst the unhappy sufferer has
considered it as an evil, from the domination of which
he had no prospect of escape.
The disease is of long duration: to connect, therefore,
the symptoms which occur in its later stages with those
which mark its commencement, requires a continuance
of observation of the same case, or at least a correct history of its symptoms, even for several years. Of both
these advantages the writer has had the opportunities
of availing himself, and has hence been led particularly
to observe several other cases in which the disease existed in different stages of its progress. By these repeated
observations, he hoped that he had been led to a probable conjecture as to the nature of the malady, and that
analogy had suggested such means as might be productive of relief, and perhaps even of cure, if employed before the disease had been too long established. He therefore considered it to be a duty to submit his opinions to

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

the examination of others, even in their present state of
immaturity and imperfection.
To delay their publication did not, indeed, appear to
be warrantable. The disease had escaped particular notice; and the task of ascertaining its nature and cause by
anatomical investigation, did not seem likely to be taken
up by those who, from their abilities and opportunities,
were most likely to accomplish it. That these friends to
humanity and medical science, who have already unveiled to us many of the morbid processes by which
health and life is abridged, might be excited to extend
their researches to this malady, was much desired; and
it was hoped, that this might be procured by the publication of these remarks.
Should the necessary information be thus obtained,
the writer will repine at no censure which the precipitate
publication of mere conjectural suggestions may incur:
but shall think himself fully rewarded by having excited
the attention of those, who may point out the most appropriate means of relieving a tedious and most distressing malady.

CHAPTER I. DEFINITION–HISTORY–
ILLUSTRATIVE CASES
Shaking Palsy (Paralysis Agitans)
Involuntary tremulous motion, with lessened
muscular power, in parts not in action and even
when supported; with a propensity to bend the
trunk forwards, and to pass from a walking to a
running pace: the senses and intellects being uninjured.
The term Shaking Palsy has been vaguely employed
by medical writers in general. By some it has been used
to designate ordinary cases of Palsy, in which some
slight tremblings have occurred; whilst by others it has
been applied to certain anomalous affections, not belonging to Palsy.
The shaking of the limbs belonging to this disease was
particularly noticed, as will be seen when treating of the
symptoms, by Galen, who marked its peculiar character
by an appropriate term. The same symptom, it will also
be seen, was accurately treated of by Sylvius de la Boë.
An Essay on the Shaking Palsy, by James Parkinson, was originally published as a monograph by Sherwood, Neely, and Jones (London, 1817).
Punctuation and spelling follow the original text. Introduction Copyright 䉷 2002 American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.

223

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
Juncker also seems to have referred to this symptom:
having divided tremor into active and passive, he says
of the latter, “ad affectus semiparalyticos pertinant; de
qualibus hic agimus, quique tremores paralytoidei vocantur.” Tremor has been adopted, as a genus, by almost
every nosologist; but always unmarked, in their several
deﬁnitions, by such characters as would embrace this
disease. The celebrated Cullen, with his accustomed accuracy observes, “Tremorem, utpote semper symptomaticum, in numerum generum recipere nolem; species
autem a Sauvagesio recensitas, prout mihi vel astheniae
vel paralysios, vel convulsionis symptomata esse videntur, his subjungam.”* Tremor can indeed only be considered as a symptom, although several species of it must
be admitted. In the present instance, the agitation produced by the peculiar species of tremor, which here occurs, is chosen to furnish the epithet by which this species of Palsy, may be distinguished.
History
So slight and nearly imperceptible are the ﬁrst inroads
of this malady, and so extremely slow its progress, that
it rarely happens, that the patient can form any recollection of the precise period of its commencement. The
ﬁrst symptoms perceived are, a slight sense of weakness,
with a proneness to trembling in some particular part;
sometimes in the head, but most commonly in one of
the hands and arms. These symptoms gradually increase in the part ﬁrst affected; and at an uncertain period, but seldom in less than twelvemonths or more, the
morbid inﬂuence is felt in some other part. Thus assuming one of the hands and arms to be ﬁrst attacked, the
other, at this period becomes similarly affected. After a
few more months the patient is found to be less strict
than usual in preserving an upright posture: this being
most observable whilst walking, but sometimes whilst
sitting or standing. Sometime after the appearance of
this symptom, and during its slow increase, one of the
legs is discovered slightly to tremble, and is also found
to suffer fatigue sooner than the leg of the other side:
and in a few months this limb becomes agitated by similar tremblings, and suffers a similar loss of power.
Hitherto the patient will have experienced but little
inconvenience; and befriended by the strong inﬂuence
of habitual endurance, would perhaps seldom think of
his being the subject of disease, except when reminded
of it by the unsteadiness of his hand, whilst writing or
employing himself in any nicer kind of manipulation.
But as the disease proceeds, similar employments are
accomplished with considerable difﬁculty, the hand fail-

ing to answer with exactness to the dictates of the will.
Walking becomes a task which cannot be performed
without considerable attention. The legs are not raised
to that height, or with that promptitude which the will
directs, so that the utmost care is necessary to prevent
frequent falls.
At this period the patient experiences much inconvenience, which unhappily is found daily to increase.
The submission of the limbs to the directions of the will
can hardly ever be obtained in the performance of the
most ordinary ofﬁces of life. The ﬁngers cannot be disposed of in the proposed directions, and applied with
certainty to any proposed point. As time and the disease
proceed, difﬁculties increase: writing can now be hardly
at all accomplished; and reading, from the tremulous
motion, is accomplished with some difﬁculty. Whilst at
meals the fork not being duly directed frequently fails
to raise the morsel from the plate: which, when seized,
is with much difﬁculty conveyed to the mouth. At this
period the patient seldom experiences a suspension of
the agitation of his limbs. Commencing, for instance in
one arm, the wearisome agitation is borne until beyond
sufferance, when by suddenly changing the posture it is
for a time stopped in that limb, to commence, generally,
in less than a minute in one of the legs, or in the arm of
the other side. Harassed by this tormenting round, the
patient has recourse to walking, a mode of exercise to
which the sufferers from this malady are in general partial; owing to their attention being thereby somewhat
diverted from their unpleasant feelings, by the care and
exertion required to ensure its safe performance.
But as the malady proceeds, even this temporary mitigation of suffering from the agitation of the limbs is
denied. The propensity to lean forward becomes invincible, and the patient is thereby forced to step on the
toes and fore part of the feet, whilst the upper part of
the body is thrown so far forward as to render it difﬁcult
to avoid falling on the face. In some cases, when this
state of the malady is attained, the patient can no longer
exercise himself by walking in his usual manner, but is
thrown on the toes and forepart of the feet; being, at the
same time, irresistibly impelled to take much quicker
and shorter steps, and thereby to adopt unwillingly a
running pace. In some cases it is found necessary entirely to substitute running for walking; since otherwise
the patient, on proceeding only a very few paces, would
inevitably fall.
In this stage, the sleep becomes much disturbed. The
tremulous motion of the limbs occur during sleep, and
augment until they awaken the patient, and frequently

*Synopsis Nosologiae Methodicae.—Tom. ii. p. 195.

224

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
with much agitation and alarm. The power of conveying
the food to the mouth is at length so much impeded that
he is obliged to consent to be fed by others. The bowels,
which had been all along torpid, now, in most cases,
demand stimulating medicines of very considerable
power: the expulsion of the faeces from the rectum
sometimes requiring mechanical aid. As the disease proceeds towards its last stage, the trunk is almost permanently bowed, the muscular power is more decidedly
diminished, and the tremulous agitation becomes violent. The patient walks now with great difﬁculty, and
unable any longer to support himself with his stick, he
dares not venture on this exercise, unless assisted by an
attendant, who walking backwards before him, prevents
his falling forwards, by the pressure of his hands against
the fore part of his shoulders. His words are now
scarcely intelligible; and he is not only no longer able to
feed himself, but when the food is conveyed to the
mouth, so much are the actions of the muscles of the
tongue, pharynx, &c. impeded by impaired action and
perpetual agitation, that the food is with difﬁculty retained in the month until masticated; and then as difﬁcultly swallowed. Now also, from the same cause, another very unpleasant circumstance occurs: the saliva
fails of being directed to the back part of the fauces, and
hence is continually draining from the mouth, mixed
with the particles of food, which he is no longer able to
clear from the inside of the mouth.
As the debility increases and the inﬂuence of the will
over the muscles fades away, the tremulous agitation
becomes more vehement. It now seldom leaves him for
a moment; but even when exhausted nature seizes a
small portion of sleep, the motion becomes so violent as
not only to shake the bed-hangings, but even the ﬂoor
and sashes of the room. The chin is now almost immoveably bent down upon the sternum. The slops with
which he is attempted to be fed, with the saliva, are
continually trickling from the mouth. The power of articulation is lost. The urine and faeces are passed involuntarily; and at the last, constant sleepiness, with slight
delirium, and other marks of extreme exhaustion, announce the wished-for release.
Case I.
Almost every circumstance noted in the preceding description, was observed in a case which occurred several
years back, and which, from the particular symptoms
which manifested themselves in its progress; from the
little knowledge of its nature, acknowledged to be possessed by the physician who attended; and from the
mode of its termination; excited an eager wish to acquire
some further knowledge of its nature and cause.
The subject of this case was a man rather more than

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

ﬁfty years of age, who had industriously followed the
business of a gardener, leading a life of remarkable temperance and sobriety. The commencement of the malady
was ﬁrst manifested by a slight trembling of the left
hand and arm, a circumstance which he was disposed
to attribute to his having been engaged for several days
in a kind of employment requiring considerable exertion
of that limb. Although repeatedly questioned, he could
recollect no other circumstance which he could consider
as having been likely to have occasioned his malady. He
had not suffered much from Rheumatism, or been subject to pains of the head, or had ever experienced any
sudden seizure which could be referred to apoplexy or
hemiplegia. In this case, every circumstance occurred
which has been mentioned in the preceding history.
Case II.
The subject of the case which was next noticed was casually met with in the street. It was a man sixty-two
years of age; the greater part of whose life had been
spent as an attendant at a magistrate’s ofﬁce. He had
suffered from the disease about eight or ten years. All
the extremities were considerably agitated, the speech
was very much interrupted, and the body much bowed
and shaken. He walked almost entirely on the fore part
of his feet, and would have fallen every step if he had
not been supported by his stick. He described the disease as having come on very gradually, and as being,
according to his full assurance, the consequence of considerable irregularities in his mode of living, and particularly of indulgence in spirituous liquors. He was the
inmate of a poor-house of a distant parish, and being
fully assured of the incurable nature of his complaint,
declined making any attempts for relief.
Case III.
The next case was also noticed casually in the street. The
subject of it was a man of about sixty-ﬁve years of age,
of a remarkable athletic frame. The agitation of the
limbs, and indeed of the head and of the whole body,
was too vehement to allow it to be designated as trembling. He was entirely unable to walk; the body being
so bowed, and the head thrown so forward, as to oblige
him to go on a continued run, and to employ his stick
every ﬁve or six steps to force him more into an upright
posture, by projecting the point of it with great force
against the pavement. He stated, that he had been a
sailor, and attributed his complaints to having been for
several months conﬁned in a Spanish prison, where he
had, during the whole period of his conﬁnement, lain
upon the bare damp earth. The disease had here continued so long, and made such a progress, as to afford little
or no prospect of relief. He besides was a poor mendi-

225

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
cant, requiring as well as the means of medical experiment, those collateral aids which he could only obtain
in an hospital. He was therefore recommended to make
trial if any relief could, in that mode, be yielded him.
The poor man, however, appeared to be by no means
disposed to make the experiment.
Case IV.
The next case which presented itself was that of a gentleman about ﬁfty-ﬁve years, who had ﬁrst experienced
the trembling of the arms about ﬁve years before. His
application was on account of a considerable degree of
inﬂammation over the lower ribs on the left side, which
terminated in the formation of matter beneath the fascia.
About a pint was removed on making the necessary
opening; and a considerable quantity discharged daily
for two or three weeks. On his recovery from this, no
change appeared to have taken place in his original
complaint; and the opportunity of learning its future
progress was lost by his removal to a distant part of the
country.
Case V.
In another case, the particulars of which could not be
obtained, and the gentleman, the lamented subject of
which was only seen at a distance, one of the characteristic symptoms of this malady, the inability for motion,
except in a running pace, appeared to exist in an extraordinary degree. It seemed to be necessary that the gentleman should be supported by his attendant, standing
before him with a hand placed on each shoulder, until,
by gently swaying backward and forward, he had
placed himself in equipoise; when, giving the word, he
would start in a running pace, the attendant sliding
from before him and running forward, being ready to
receive him and prevent his falling, after his having run
about twenty paces.
Case VI.
In a case which presented itself to observation since
those above-mentioned, every information as to the
progress of the malady was very readily obtained. The
gentleman who was the subject of it is seventy-two years
of age. He has led a life of temperance, and has never
been exposed to any particular situation or circumstance
which he can conceive likely to have occasioned, or disposed to this complaint; which he rather seems to regard
as incidental upon his advanced age, than as an object
of medical attention. He however recollects, that about
twenty years ago, he was troubled with lumbago, which
was severe and lasted some time. About eleven or
twelve, or perhaps more, years ago, he ﬁrst perceived

226

weakness in the left hand and arm, and soon after found
the trembling commence. In about three years afterwards the right arm became affected in a similar manner: and soon afterwards the convulsive motions affected the whole body, and began to interrupt the
speech. In about three years from that time the legs became affected. Of late years the action of the bowels had
been very much retarded; and at two or three different
periods had, with great difﬁculty, been made to yield to
the action of very strong cathartics. But within the last
twelvemonths this difﬁculty has not been so great; perhaps owing to an increased secretion of mucus, which
envelopes the passing faeces, and which precedes and
follows their discharge in considerable quantity.
About a year since, on waking in the night, he found
that he had nearly lost the use of the right side, and that
the face was much drawn to the left side. His medical
attendant saw him the following day, when he found
him languid, with a small and quick pulse, and without
pain in the head or disposition to sleep. Nothing more
therefore was done than to promote the action of the
bowels, and apply a blister to the back of the neck, and
in about a fortnight the limbs had entirely recovered
from their palsied state. During the time of their having
remained in this state, neither the arm nor the leg of the
paralytic side was in the least affected with the tremulous agitation; but as their paralysed state was removed,
the shaking returned.
At present he is almost constantly troubled with the
agitation, which he describes as generally commencing
in a slight degree, and gradually increasing, until it
arises to such a height as to shake the room; when, by a
sudden and somewhat violent change of posture, he is
almost always able to stop it. But very soon afterwards
it will commence in some other limb, in a small degree,
and gradually increase in violence; but he does not remember the thus checking of it, to have been followed
by any injurious effect. When the agitation had not been
thus interrupted, he stated, that it gradually extended
through all the limbs, and at last affected the whole
trunk. To illustrate his observation as to the power of
suspending the motion by a sudden change of posture,
he, being then just come in from a walk, with every limb
shaking, threw himself rather violently into a chair, and
said, “Now I am as well as ever I was in my life.” The
shaking completely stopped; but returned within two
minutes’ time.
He now possessed but little power in giving a required direction to the motions of any part. He was
scarcely able to feed himself. He had written hardly intelligibly for the last three years; and at present could
not write at all. His attendants observed, that of late the
trembling would sometimes begin in his sleep, and in-

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
crease until it awakened him: when he always was in a
state of agitation and alarm.
On being asked if he walked under much apprehension of falling forwards? he said he suffered much from
it; and replied in the afﬁrmative to the question, whether
he experienced any difﬁculty in restraining himself from
getting into a running pace? It being asked, if whilst
walking he felt much apprehension from the difﬁculty
of raising his feet, if he saw a rising pebble in his path?
he avowed, in a strong manner, his alarm on such occasions; and it was observed by his wife, that she believed, that in walking across the room, he would consider as difﬁculty the having to step over a pin.
The preceding cases appear to belong to the same species: differing from each other, perhaps, only in the
length of time which the disease had existed, and the
stage at which it had arrived.

CHAPTER II. PATHOGNOMIC SYMPTOMS
EXAMINED–TREMOR COACTUS–SCELOTYRBE
FESTINANS
It has been seen in the preceding history of the disease,
and in the accompanying cases, that certain affections,
the tremulous agitations, and the almost invincible propensity to run, when wishing only to walk, each of
which has been considered by nosologists as distinct
diseases, appear to be pathognomic symptoms of this
malady. To determine in which of these points of view
these affections ought to be regarded, an examination
into their nature, and an inquiry into the opinions of
preceding writers respecting them, seem necessary to be
attempted.
I. Involuntary tremulous motion, with lessened
voluntary power, in parts, not in action, and even
supported.
It is necessary that the peculiar nature of this tremulous
motion should be ascertained, as well for the sake of

giving to it its proper designation, as for assisting in
forming probable conjectures, as to the nature of the
malady, which it helps to characterise. Tremors were distinguished by Juncker into Active, those proceeding
from sudden affection of the minds, as terror, anger, &c.
and Passive, dependant on debilitating causes, such as
advanced age, palsy, &c.* But a much more satisfactory
and useful distinction is made by Sylvius de la Boë into
those tremors which are produced by attempts at voluntary motion, and those which occur whilst the body
is at rest.† Sauvages distinguishes the latter of these species (Tremor Coactus) by observing, that the tremulous
parts leap, and as it were vibrate, even when supported:
whilst every other tremor, he observes, ceases, when the
voluntary exertion for moving the limbs stops, or the
part is supported, but returns when we will the limb to
move; whence, he says, tremor is distinguished from
every other kind of spasm.‡
A small degree of attention will be sufﬁcient to perceive, that Sauvages, by this just distinction, actually
separates this kind of tremulous motion, and which is
the kind peculiar to this disease, from the Genus Tremor.
In doing this he is fully warranted by the observations
of Galen on the same subject, as noticed by Van Swieten.§ “Binas has tremoris species㛳 Galenus subtiliter distinxit, atque etiam diversis nominibus insignivit, tremor
enim (sq␱l␱r) facultatis corpus moventis et vehentis inﬁrmitate oboritur. Quippe nemo, qui artus movere non
instituerit tremet. Palpitantes autem partes, etiam in
quiete fuerint, etiamsi nullum illis motum induxeris palpitant. Ideo primam (posteriorem) modo descriptam tremoris speciem, quando quiescenti homini involuntariis
illis et alternis motibus agitantur membra, palpitationem (p␣kl␱m) dixit, posteriorem (primam) vero, quae
non ﬁt nisi homo conetur partes quasdam movere tremorem vocavit.”
Under this authority the term palpitation may be employed to mark those morbid motions which chieﬂy
characterise this disease, notwithstanding that this term
has been anticipated by Sauvages, as characteristic he

*Junckeri conspect. de tremore.
†Sect. v. Ubi autem solito pauciores deferunter ad eadem organa spiritus animales, imperfectae ac imbecillae observantur ﬁeri eadem functiones,
in motu tremulo et inﬁrmo, nec diu durante, in visu debili, ac mox defatigato, &c.
Sect. XIX. Inaequaliter, inordinatè, ac praeter contraque voluntatem moventur spiritus animales per nervos ad partes mobiles, in motu convulsivo, ac tremore, quassuve membrorum coacto.
Distinguendus namque his tremor quiescente licet ac decumbente corpore molustus a motu tremulo, de quo dictum. Sect. v. Quique quiescente
corpore cessat, eodemque iterum moto repetit.
Sect. XXV. Coactus tremor debetur animalibus spiritibus inordinatè ac continuo, cum aliquo impetu ad trementium membrorum musculos per
nervos propulsis: sive fuerit is universalis, sive particularis, sive corpus fuerit ad huc robustum sive debile, Sylvii de la Boë Prax. lib i. cap. xlii.
‡Nosolog. Methodic. Auctore Fr. Boissier de Sauvages, Tomi. II. Partis ii. p. 54. 1763.
§Comment. in Herman. Boerhaav. Aphorismos. Tom. ii. p. 181.
㛳De tremore. Cap. 3 and 4. Chart, Tom. vii. p. 200 201.

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

227

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
limbs of another species of tremor.* The separation of
palpitation of the limbs (Palmos of Galen, Tremor Coactus
of de la Boë) from tremor, is the more necessary to be
insisted on, since the distinction may assist in leading
to a knowledge of the seat of the disease. It is also necessary to bear in mind, that this affection is distinguishable from tremor, by the agitation, in the former, occurring whilst the affected part is supported and
unemployed, and being even checked by the adoption
of voluntary motion; whilst in the latter, the tremor is
induced immediately on bringing the parts into action.
Thus an artist, afﬂicted with the malady here treated of,
whilst his hand and arm is palpitating strongly, will
seize his pencil, and the motions will be suspended, allowing him to use it for a short period; but in tremor, if
the hand be quite free from the affection, should the pen
or pencil be taken up, the trembling immediately commences.
II. A propensity to bend the trunk forwards, and to pass
from a walking to a running pace.
This affection, which observation seems to authorise the
being considered as a symptom peculiar to this disease,
has been mentioned by few nosologists: it appears to
have been ﬁrst noticed by Gaubius, who says, “Cases
occur in which the muscles duly excited into action by
the impulse of the will, do then, with an unbidden agility, and with an impetus not to be repressed, accelerate
their motion, and run before the unwilling mind. It is a
frequent fault of the muscles belonging to speech, nor
yet of these alone: I have seen one, who was able to run,
but not to walk.”†
Sauvages, referring to this symptom, says, another
disease which has been very rarely seen by authors, appears to be referable to the same genus (Scelotyrbe, of
which he makes Chorea sancti viti the ﬁrst species);
which, he says, “I think cannot be more ﬁtly named than
hastening or hurrying Scelotyrbe (Scelotyrbem festinantem, seu festiniam).”

Scelotyrbe festinans, he says, is a peculiar species of scelotyrbe, in which the patients, whilst wishing to walk in
the ordinary mode, are forced to run, which has been
seen by Carguet and by the illustrious Gaubius; a similar
affection of the speech, when the tongue thus outruns
the mind, is termed volubility. Mons. de Sauvages attributes this complaint to a want of ﬂexibility in the muscular ﬁbres. Hence, he supposes, that the patients make
shorter steps, and strive with a more than common exertion or impetus to overcome the resistance; walking
with a quick and hastened step, as if hurried along
against their will. Chorea Viti, he says, attacks the youth
of both sexes, but this disease only those advanced in
years; and adds, that it has hitherto happened to him to
have seen only two of these cases; and that he has nothing to offer respecting them, either in theory or practice.‡
Having made the necessary inquiries respecting these
two affections, Tremor coactum of Sylvius de la Boë and
of Sauvages, and Scelotyrbe festinans of the latter nosologist, which appear to be characteristic symptoms of this
disease, it becomes necessary, in the next place, to endeavour to distinguish this disease from others which
may bear a resemblance to it in some particular respects.

CHAPTER III. SHAKING PALSY DISTINGUISHED
FROM OTHER DISEASES WITH WHICH IT MAY
BE CONFOUNDED
Treating of a disease resulting from an assemblage of
symptoms, some of which do not appear to have yet
engaged the general notice of the profession, particular
care is required whilst endeavouring to mark its diagnostic characters. It is sufﬁcient, in general, to point out
the characteristic differences which are observable between diseases in some respects resembling each other.
But in this case more is required: it is necessary to show
that it is a disease which does not accord with any which
are marked in the systematic arrangements of nosolo-

*Sect. XVI. Tremor palpitans. Preysinger classis morborum. Palmos Galeni.
In tremoribus vulgaribus, aequalibus temporum intervallis, non musculus, sed artus ipsemet alternatim attollitur aut deprimitur, aut in oppositas partes it atque redit per minima tamen spatiola; in palpitatione verò sine ullo ordine musculi unius lacertus subito subsilit, nec regulariter
continuoque movetur, sed nunc semel aut bis, nunc minimè intra idem tempus subsilit; an causa irritans in sensorio communi, an in musculo
ipse palpitante Quaerenda sit, ignoramus. Nosologiae Methodicae, Vol. I. p. 559. 1768.
But the adoption which Sauvages has made of this term, will not be regarded as an absolute prohibition from the employment of it here; since
the tremor palpitans of Sauvages should be considered rather as a palpitation of the muscles, whilst the motion which is so prominent a symptom
in this disease, may be considered as a palpitation of the limbs.
†Est et ubi musculi, recte quidem ad voluntatis nutum in actum concitati, injussa dein agilitate atque impetu non reprimendo motus suos
accelerant, mentemque invatem praecurrunt. Vitium loquelae musculis frequens, nec his solis tamen proprium: vidi enim, qui currere, non gradi,
poterat. —Institution. Patholog, Medicinal. Auctore. H.D. Gaubio. 751.
‡Ad idem genus morbi altera species rarissima ab auctoribus praetervisa referenda videtur, quam non aptius nominari posse putem quàm
scelotyrbem festinantem, seu festiniam.
Sect. II. Scelotyrbe festinans; est peculiaris scelotyrbes species in qua aegri solito more dum gradi volunt currere cognuntur, quod videre est
apud D. Carquet, et observavit Leydae illustr. Gaubius. Patholog. instit. 751, et in loquela haec volubilitas dicitur quâ lingua praecurit mentem.

228

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
gists; and that the name by which it is here distinguished
has been hitherto vaguely applied to diseases very different from each other, as well as from that to which it
is now appropriated.
Palsy, either consequent to compression of the brain,
or dependent on partial exhaustion of the energy of that
organ, may, when the palsied limbs become affected
with tremulous motions, be confounded with this disease. In those cases the abolition or diminution of voluntary muscular action takes place suddenly, the sense
of feeling being sometimes also impaired. But in this
disease, the diminution of the inﬂuence of the will on
the muscles comes on with extreme slowness, is always
accompanied, and even preceded, by agitations of the
affected parts, and never by a lessened sense of feeling.
The dictates of the will are even, in the last stages of the
disease, conveyed to the muscles; and the muscles act
on this impulse, but their actions are perverted.
Anomalous cases of convulsive affections have been
designated by the term Shaking Palsy: a term which appears to be improperly applied to these cases, independent of the want of accordance between them and that
disease which has been here denominated Shaking
Palsy. Dr. Kirkland, in his commentary on Apoplectic
and Paralytic Affections, &c. cites the following case,
related by Dr. Charlton, as belonging, he says, to the
class of Shaking Palsies. “Mary Ford, of a sanguineous
and robust constitution, had an involuntary motion of
her right arm, occasioned by a fright, which ﬁrst brought
on convulsion ﬁts, and most excruciating pain in the
stomach, which vanished on a sudden, and her right
arm was instantaneously ﬂung into an involuntary and
perpetual motion, like the swing of a pendulum, raising
the hand, at every vibration higher than her head; but
if by any means whatever it was stopped; the pain in
her stomach came on again, and convulsion ﬁts were
the certain consequence, which went off when the vibration of her hand returned.”
Another case, which the Doctor designates as “A
Shaking Palsy,” apparently from worms, he describes

thus, “A poor boy, about twelve or thirteen years of age,
was seized with a Shaking Palsy. His legs became useless, and together with his head and hands, were in continual agitation; after many weeks trial of various remedies, my assistance was desired.”
“His bowels being cleared, I ordered him a grain of
Opium a day in the gum pill; and in three or four days
the shaking had nearly left him.” By pursuing this plan,
the medicine proving a vermifuge, he could soon walk,
and was restored to perfect health.
Whether these cases should be classed under Shaking
Palsy or not, is necessary to be here determined; since,
if they are properly ranked, the cases which have been
described in the preceding pages, differ so much from
them as certainly to oppose their being classed together:
and the disease, which is the subject of these pages, cannot be considered as the same with Shaking Palsy, as
characterised by those cases.
The term Shaking Palsy is evidently inapplicable to
the ﬁrst of these cases, which appears to have belonged
more properly to the genus Convulsio, of Cullen, or to
Hieranosos of Linnaeus and Vogel.*
The latter appears to be referable to that class of proteal forms of disease, generated by a disordered state of
primae viae, sympathetically affecting the nervous inﬂuence in a distant part of the body.
Unless attention is paid to one circumstance, this disease will be confounded with those species of passive
tremblings to which the term Shaking Palsies has frequently been applied. These are, tremor temulentus, the
trembling consequent to indulgence in the drinking of
spirituous liquors; that which proceeds from the immoderate employment of tea and coffee; that which appears to be dependent on advanced age; and all those
tremblings which proceed from the various circumstances which induce a diminution of power in the nervous system. But by attending to that circumstance
alone, which has been already noted as characteristic of
mere tremor, the distinction will readily be made. If the
trembling limb be supported, and none of its muscles

Video actu mulierem sexagenariam hoc affectam morbo siccitati nervorum tribuendo; laborat enim rheumatismo sicco, seu ab acrimonia sanguinis, dolores nocte a calore recrudescunt, à thermis non sublevantur: ei praescripsi phlebotomiam, et praemissis jusculis ex lactucâ, endiviâ,
et collo arietis, lene catharticum, inde vero lacticinia.
Est afﬁnitas cum scelotyrbe, chorea viti, deest ﬂexibilitas in ﬁbris musculorum; unde motus breves edunt, et conatu seu impetu solito majori,
cum resistentiam illam superare nituntur, velut inviti festinant, ac praecipiti seu concitato passu gradiuntur. Chorea viti pueros, puellasve
impuberes aggreditur; festinia vero senes, et duos tantum hactenus observare mihi contigit. Quam multos autem videmus morbos, paucissimosque observamus. De theoria et pràxi nihil habeo quod dicam; etenim sola experienta praxim cujusvis morbi determinat, et ex hac pro felici vel
infausto successu theoria dein elicienda est. Nosolog. Methodic. Auctore, Fr. Boissier de Sauvages. Tomi. II. Part ii. p. 108.
*Corporis agitatio continua, indolens, convulsiva, cum sensibilitate.—Linn.
Agitatio corporis vel artuum convulsiva continua, chronica, cum integritate sensuum.—Vogel.
This genus is resolved by Cullen into that of Convulsio. Synops. Nosol. 1803.
Dr. Macbride has given a very interesting and illustrative case of this disease.
“Hieranasos, or Morbus Sacer, so called, as being vulgarly supposed to arise from witchcraft, or some extraordinary celestial inﬂuence, is a

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

229

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
be called into action, the trembling will cease. In the real
Shaking Palsy the reverse of this takes place, the agitation continues in full force whilst the limb is at rest and
unemployed; and even is sometimes diminished by calling the muscles into employment.

CHAPTER IV. PROXIMATE CAUSE–REMOTE
CAUSES–ILLUSTRATIVE CASES
Before making the attempt to point out the nature and
cause of this disease, it is necessary to plead, that it is
made under very unfavourable circumstances. Unaided
by previous inquiries immediately directed to this disease, and not having had the advantage, in a single case,
of that light which anatomical examination yields, opinions and not facts can only be offered. Conjecture
founded on analogy, and an attentive consideration of
the peculiar symptoms of the disease, have been the
only guides that could be obtained for this research, the
result of which is, as it ought to be, offered with hesitation.
Supposed Proximate Cause
A diseased state of the medulla spinalis, in that part
which is contained in the canal, formed by the superior cervical vertebrae, and extending, as the disease proceeds, to the medulla oblongata.
By the nature of the symptoms we are taught, that the
disease depends on some irregularity in the direction of
the nervous inﬂuence; by the wide range of parts which
are affected, that the injury is rather in the source of this
inﬂuence than merely in the nerves of the parts; by the
situation of the parts whose actions are impaired, and
the order in which they become affected, that the proximate cause of the disease is in the superior part of the
medulla spinalis; and by the absence of any injury to the
senses and to the intellect, that the morbid state does not
extend to the encephalon.
Uncertainty existing as to the nature of the proximate
cause of this disease, its remote causes must necessarily
be referred to with indecision. Assuming however the
state just mentioned as the proximate cause, it may be
concluded that this may be the result of injuries of the

medulla itself, or of the theca helping to form the canal
in which it is inclosed.
The great degree of mobility in that portion of the
spine which is formed by the superior cervical vertebrae, must render it, and the contained parts, liable to
injury from sudden distortions. Hence therefore may
proceed inﬂammation of quicker or of slower progress,
disease of the vertebrae, derangement of structure in the
medulla, or in its membranes, thickening or even ulceration of the theca, effusion of ﬂuids, &c.
But in no case which has been noticed, has the patient
recollected receiving any injury of this kind, or any ﬁxed
pain in early life in these parts, which might have led to
the opinion that the foundation for this malady had
been thus laid. On the subject indeed of remote causes,
no satisfactory accounts has yet been obtained from any
of the sufferers. Whilst one has attributed this afﬂiction
to indulgence in spirituous liquors, and another to long
lying on the damp ground; the others have been unable
to suggest any circumstance whatever, which, in their
opinion, could be considered as having given origin, or
disposed, to the calamity under which they suffered.
Cases illustrative of the nature and cause of this malady are very rare. In the following case symptoms very
similar are observable, so far as affecting the lower extremities. That the medulla spinalis was here affected,
and in its lower part, is not to be doubted: but this, unfortunately, was never ascertained by examination. It
must be however remarked, that this case differed from
those which have been given of this disease, in the suddenness, with which the symptoms appeared.
A.B. aged twenty-six years, during a course of mercury for a venereal affection, was exposed to severely
inclement weather, for several hours, and the next morning, complained of extreme pain in the back, and of total
inability to employ voluntarily the muscles of the lower
extremities, which were continually agitated with severe
convulsive motions. The physician who attended him
employed those means which seemed best calculated to
relieve him; but with no beneﬁcial effect. The lower extremities were perpetually agitated with strong palpitatory motions, and, frequently, three or four times in a
minute, suddenly raised with great vehemence two or
three feet from the ground, either in a forward or
oblique direction, striking one limb against the other,

distinct genus of disease, though a very uncommon one; the author once had an opportunity of seeing a case. The patient was a lad about
seventeen, who at that time had laboured under this extraordinary disease for more than twelve years. His body was so distorted, and the legs
and arms so twisted round it, by the continued convulsive working, that no words can give an adequate idea of the oddity of his ﬁgure; the
agitation of the muscles was perpetual; but in general he did not complain of pain nor sickness; and had his senses perfectly, insomuch that he
used to assist his mother, who kept a little school, in teaching children to read.” A Methodical Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Physic. By
David Macbride, M.D. p. 559

230

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
or against the chairs, tables, or any substance which
stood in the way. To check these inordinate motions, no
means were in the least effectual, except striking the
thighs forcibly during the more violent convulsions. No
advantage derived from all the means which were employed during upwards of twelve months. Full ten years
after this period, the unhappy subject of this malady
was casually met in the street, shifting himself along,
seated in a chair; the convulsive motions having ceased,
and the limbs having become totally inert, and insensible to any impulse of the will.
It must be acknowledged, that in the well-known
cases, described by Mr. Potts, of that kind of Palsy of the
lower limbs which is frequently found to accompany a
curvature of the spine, and in which a carious state of
the vertebrae is found to exist, no instructive analogy is
discoverable; slight convulsive motions may indeed
happen in the disease proceeding from the curvature of
the spine; but palpitating motions of the limbs, such as
belong to the disease here described, do not appear to
have been hitherto noticed.
Whilst striving to determine the nature and origin of
this disease, it becomes necessary to give the following
particulars of an interesting case of Palsy occasioned by
a fall, attended with uncommon symptoms, related by
Dr. Maty, in the third volume of the Medical Observations and Inquiries. The subject of this case, the Count
de Lordat, had the misfortune to be overturned from a
pretty high and steep bank. His head pitched against
the top of the coach, and was bent from left to right; his
left shoulder, arm, and especially his hand, were considerably bruised. At ﬁrst he felt a good deal of pain along
the left side of his neck, but neither then, nor at any other
time, had he any faintings, vomitings, or giddiness. —
On the sixth day he was let blood, on account of the
pain in his shoulder and the contusion of his hand,
which were then the only symptoms he complained of,
and of which he soon found himself relieved. —Towards
the beginning of the following winter, he began to ﬁnd
a small impediment in uttering some words, and his left arm
appeared weaker. In the following spring, having suffered
considerably from the severities of the winter campaign,
he found the difﬁculty in speaking, and in moving his left
arm, considerably increased. —On employing the thermal
waters of Bourbonne, his speech became freer, but, on
his return to Paris, the Palsy was increased, and the arm
somewhat wasted. —In the beginning of the next spring
he went to Balaruc; when he became affected with involuntary convulsive motions all over the body. The left arm
withered more and more, a spitting began, and now it
was with difﬁculty that he uttered a few words. Frictions
and sinapisms were successively tried, and an issue,
made by a caustic, was kept open for some time without

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

any effect; but no mention is made of what part the issue
was established in.
Soon after this, and three years and a half after the
fall, Doctor Maty ﬁrst saw the patient, and gives the
following description of his situation. “A more melancholy object I never beheld. The patient, naturally a
handsome, middle-sized, sanguine man, of a cheerful
disposition, and an active mind, appeared much emaciated, stooping, and dejected. He still walked alone with
a cane, from one room to the other, but with great difﬁculty,
and in a tottering manner; his left hand and arm were
much reduced, and would hardly perform any motion;
the right was somewhat benumbed, and he could scarcely lift
it up to his head; his saliva was continually trickling out of
his mouth, and he had neither the power of retaining it, nor
of spitting it out freely. What words he still could utter
were monosyllables, and these came out, after much
struggle, in a violent expiration, and with such a low
voice and indistinct articulation, as hardly to be understood but by those who were constantly with him. He
fetched his breath rather hard; his pulse was low, but
neither accelerated nor intermitting. He took very little
nourishment, could chew and swallow no solids, and
even found great pain in getting down liquids. Milk was
almost his only food; his body was rather loose, his
urine natural, his sleep good, his senses, and the powers
of his mind, unimpaired; he was attentive to, and sensible of every thing which was said in conversation, and
shewed himself very desirous of joining in it; but was
continually checked by the impediment in his speech,
and the difﬁculty which his hearers were put to. Happily for him he was able to read, and as capable as ever
of writing, as he shewed me, by putting into my hands
an account of his present situation, drawn up by himself:
and I am informed that he spent his time to the very
last, in writing upon some of the most abstruse subjects.”
This gentleman died about four years after the accident, when the body was examined by Dr. Bellett and
Mons. Sorbier, who made the following report:
“We ﬁrst examined the muscles of the tongue, which
were found extenuated and of a loose texture. We observed no signs of compression in the lingual and brachial nerves, as high as their exit from the basis of the
cranium and the vertebrae of the neck; but they appeared to us more compact than they commonly are,
being nearly tendinous. The dura mater was in a sound
state, but the pia mater was full of blood and lymph; on
it several hydatids, and towards the falx some marks of
suppuration were observed. The ventricles were ﬁlled
with water, and the plexus choroides was considerably
enlarged, and stuffed with grumous blood. The cortical
surface of the brain appeared much browner than usual,

231

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
but neither the medullary part nor cerebellum were impaired. We chieﬂy took notice of the Medulla Oblongata,
this was greatly enlarged, surpassing the usual size by
more than one third. It was likewise more compact. The
membranes, which, in their continuation, inclose the
spinal marrow, were so tough that we found great difﬁculty in cutting through them, and we observed this to
be the cause of the tendinous texture of the cervical
nerves. The marrow itself had acquired such solidity as
to elude the pressure of our ﬁngers, it resisted as a callous body, and could not be bruised. This hardness was
observed all along the vertebrae of the neck, but lessened by degrees, and was not near so considerable in
the vertebrae of the thorax. Though the patient was but
nine and thirty years old, the cartilages of the sternum
were ossiﬁed, and required as much labour to cut them
asunder as the ribs; like these they were springy, but
somewhat whiter. The lungs and heart were sound. At
the bottom of the stomach appeared an inﬂammation,
which increased as it extended to the intestines. The ileum looked of that dark and livid hue, which is observed in membranous parts tending to mortiﬁcation.
The colon was not above an inch in diameter, the rectum
was smaller still, but both appeared sound. —From
these appearances, we were at no loss to ﬁx the cause of
this gradual palsy in the alteration of the medulla spinalis and oblongata.”
Dr. Bellett offers the following explanation of these
changes. “I conceive, that, by this accident, the head being violently bent to the right, the nervous membranes
on the left were excessively stretched and irritated; that
this cause extended by degrees to the spinal marrow,
which being thereby compressed, brought on the paralytic symptoms, not only of the left arm, but at last in
some measure also of the right. This induration seems
to have been occasioned by the constant afﬂux of the
nutritive juices, which were stopt at that place, and deprived of their most liquid parts; the grosser ones being
unable to spread in the boney cavity, by which they were
conﬁned, could only acquire a greater solidity, and
change a soft body into a hard and nearly osseous mass.
This likewise accounts for the increase of the medulla
oblongata, which being loaded with more juices than it
could send off, swelled in the same manner as the
branches of trees, which will grow of a monstrous size,
when the sap that runs into them is stopt in its progress.

The medulla oblongata not growing so hard as the spinalis, was doubtless owing to its not being conﬁned in an
osseous theca, but surrounded with soft parts, which
allowed it room to spread. The obstruction from the bulk
of this substance must have affected the brain, and probably induced the thickening of the pia mater, the hydatids, and the beginning of suppuration, whereas the
dura mater, being of a harder texture, was not injured.”*
In some of the symptoms which appeared in this case,
an agreement is observable between it and those cases
which are mentioned in the beginning of these pages.
The weakened state of both arms; the power ﬁrst lessening in one arm, and then in a similar manner in the
other arm; the affection of the speech; the difﬁculty in
chewing and in swallowing; as well as of retaining, or
freely discharging, the spittle; the convulsive motions of
the body; and the unimpaired state of the intellects; constitute such a degree of accordance as, although it may
not mark an identity of disease, serves at least to show
that nearly the same parts were the seat of the disease
in both instances. Thus we attain something like conﬁrmation of the supposed proximate cause, and of one of
the assumed occasional causes.
Whilst conjecturing as to the cause of this disease, the
following collected observations on the effects of injury
to the medulla spinalis, by Sir Everard Home, become
particularly deserving of attention. It thence appears,
that none of the characteristic symptoms of this malady
are produced by compression, laceration, or complete
division of the medulla spinalis.
“Pressure upon the medulla spinalis of the neck, by
coagulated blood, produced paralytic affections of the
arms and legs; all the functions of the internal organs
were carried on for thirty-ﬁve days, but the urine and
stools passed involuntarily.†
“Blood extravasated in the central part of the medulla,
in the neck, was attended with paralytic affection of the
legs, but not of the arms.‡
“In a case where the substance of the medulla was
lacerated in the neck, there was a paralysis in all the
parts below the laceration, the lining of the oesophagus
was so sensible, that solids could not be swallowed, on
account of the pain they occasioned.§
“When the medulla of the back was completely divided, there was momentary loss of sight, loss of memory of ﬁfteen minutes, and permanent insensibility in all

*Medical Observations and Inquiries, Vol. III. p. 257.
†A coagulum of blood, the thickness of a crown-piece, was found lying upon the external surface of the dura-matral covering of the medulla
spinalis, extending from the fourth vertebra colli to the second vertebra dorsi. The medulla spinalis itself was uninjured.
‡The sixth and seventh vertebra colli were dislocated, the medulla spinalis, externally, was uninjured; but in the centre of its substance, just
at that part, there was a coagulation of blood nearly two inches in length.
§The seventh vertebra colli was fractured, and the medulla spinalis passing through it, was lacerated and compressed.

232

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
the lower parts of the body. The skin above the division
of the spinal marrow perspired, that below did not. The
wounded spinal marrow appeared to be extremely sensible.* Philosophical Transactions, 1816, p. 485.
In two of the cases already noticed, symptoms of
rheumatism had previously existed; and in Case IV the
right arm, in which the palpitation began, was said to
have been very violently affected with rheumatic pain
to the ﬁngers ends. The consideration of this case, in
which the palpitation had been preceded, at a considerable distance of time, by this painful affection of the
arm, led to the supposition that this latter circumstance
might be the cause of the palpitations, and the other
subsequent symptoms of this disease. This supposition
naturally occasioned the attention to be eagerly ﬁxed on
the following case; and of course inﬂuenced the mode
of treatment which was adopted.
A.B. subject to rheumatic affection of the deltoid muscle, had felt the usual inconveniences from it for two or
three days; but at night found the pain had extended
down the arm, along the inside of the fore-arm, and on
the sides of the ﬁngers, in which a continual tingling
was felt. The pain, without being extremely intense, was
such as effectually to prevent sleep: and seemed to follow the course of the brachial nerve. Whilst ascertaining
the propriety of this conclusion, the pain was found to
ramify, as it were, on the fore and back part of the chest;
and was slightly augmented by drawing a deep breath.
These circumstances suggested the probability of
slight inﬂammation, or increased determination to the
origin of the nerves of these parts, and to the neighbouring medulla. On this ground, blood was taken from
the back part of the neck, by cupping; hot fomentations
were applied for about the space of an hour, when the
upper part of the back of the neck was covered with a
blister, perspiration was freely induced by two or three
small doses of antimonials, and the following morning
the bowels were evacuated by an appropriate dose of
calomel. On the following day the pains were much diminished, and in the course of four or ﬁve days were
quite removed. The arm and hand felt now more than
ordinarily heavy, and were evidently much weakened:
aching, and feeling extremely wearied after the least exertion. The strength of the arm was not completely recovered at the end of more than twelvemonths; and, after more than twice that time, exertion would excite the
feeling of painful weariness, but no palpitation or other
unpleasant symptom has occurred during the ﬁve or six
years which have since passed.
The commencement, progress, and termination of this
attack; with the success attending the mode of treat-

ment, and the symptoms which followed, seem to lead
to the conjecture, that the proximate cause of the disease,
in this case, existed in the medulla spinalis, and that it
might, if neglected, have gradually resolved itself into
that disease which is the object of our present inquiry.
Some few months after the occurrence of the preceding case, the writer of these lines was called to a female
about forty years of age, complaining of great pain in
both the arms, extending from the shoulder to the ﬁnger
ends. She stated, that she was attacked in the same manner as is described in the preceding case, about nine
months before; that the complaint was considered as
rheumatism, and was not beneﬁted by any of the medicines which had been employed; but that after three or
four weeks it gradually amended, leaving both the arms
and hands in a very weakened and trembling state.
From this state they were now somewhat recovered; but
she was extremely anxious, fearing that if the present
attack should not be soon checked, she might entirely
lose the use of her hands and arms.
Instructed by the preceding case, similar means were
here recommended. Leeches, stimulating fomentations,
and a blister, which was made for sometime to yield a
purulent discharge, were applied over the cervical vertebrae; and in the course of a very few days the pain
was entirely removed. It is regretted that no farther information, as to the progress of this case, could be obtained.
On meeting with these two cases, it was thought that
it might not be improbable that attacks of this kind, considered at the time merely as rheumatic affections, might
lay the foundation of this lamentable disease, which
might manifest itself at some distant period, when the
circumstance in which it had originated, had, perhaps,
almost escaped the memory. Indeed when it is considered that neither in the ordinary cases of Palsy of the
lower extremities, proceeding from diseased spine, nor
in cases of injured medulla from fractured vertebrae,
any of the peculiar symptoms of this disease are observable, we necessarily doubt as to the probability of its
being the direct effect of any sudden injury. But taking
all circumstances into due consideration, particularly
the very gradual manner in which the disease commences, and proceeds in its attacks; as well as the inability to ascribe its origin to any more obvious cause,
we are led to seek for it in some slow morbid change in
the structure of the medulla, or its investing membranes,
or theca, occasioned by simple inﬂammation, or rheumatic or scrophulous affection.
It must be too obvious that the evidence adduced as
to the nature of the proximate and occasional causes of

*The spinal marrow, within the canal of the sixth vertebra dorsi, was completely destroyed by a musket ball. The person lived four days.

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

233

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
this disease, is by no means conclusive. A reference to
the test therefore which will be yielded by an examination of some of the more prominent symptoms, especially as to their agreement with the supposed proximate cause, is more particularly demanded. Satisﬁed as
to the importance of this part of the present undertaking, no apology is offered for the extent to which the
examination is carried on.
If the palpitation and the attendant weakness of the
limbs, &c. be considered as to the order in which the
several parts are attacked, it is believed, that some conﬁrmation will be obtained of the opinion which has been
just offered, respecting the cause, or at least the seat, of
that change which may be considered as the proximate
cause of this disease.
One of the arms, in all the cases which have been here
mentioned, has been the part in which these symptoms
have been ﬁrst noticed; the legs, head, and trunk have
then become gradually affected, and lastly, the muscles
of the mouth and fauces have yielded to the morbid
inﬂuence.
The arms, the parts ﬁrst manifesting disordered action, of course direct us, whilst searching for the cause
of these changes, to the brachial nerves. But ﬁnding the
mischief extending to other parts, not supplied with
these, but with other nerves derived from nearly the
same part of the medulla spinalis, we are of course led
to consider that portion of the medulla spinalis itself,
from which these nerves are derived, as the part in
which those changes have taken place, which constitute
the proximate cause of this disease.
From the subsequent affection of the lower extremities, and from the failure of power in the muscles of the
trunk, such a change in the substance of the medulla
spinalis may be inferred, as shall have considerably interrupted, and interfered with, the extension of the nervous inﬂuence to those parts, whose nerves are derived
from any portion of the medulla below the part which
has undergone the diseased change.
The difﬁculty in supporting the trunk erect, as well as
the propensity to the adopting of a hurried pace, is also
referable to such a diminution of the nervous power in
the extensor muscles of the head and trunk, as prevents
them from performing the ofﬁces of maintaining the
head and body in an erect position.
From the impediment to speech, the difﬁculty in mastication and swallowing, the inability to retain, or freely
to eject, the Saliva, may with propriety be inferred an
extension of the morbid change upwards through the
medulla spinalis to the medulla oblongata, necessarily
impairing the powers of the several nerves derived from
that portion into which the morbid change may have
reached. In the late occurrence of this set of symptoms,

234

and the extension upwards of the diseased state, a very
close agreement is observable between this disease and
that which has been already shown, proved fatal to the
Count de Lordat. But in this case, the disease doubtlessly became differently modiﬁed, and its symptoms
considerably accelerated, in consequence of the magnitude of the injury by which the disease was induced.

CHAPTER V. CONSIDERATIONS RESPECTING
THE MEANS OF CURE
The inquiries made in the preceding pages yield, it is to
be much regretted, but little more than evidence of inference: nothing direct and satisfactory has been obtained. All that has been ventured to assume here, has
been that the disease depends on a disordered state of
that part of the medulla which is contained in the cervical vertebrae. But of what nature that morbid change
is; and whether originating in the medulla itself, in its
membranes, or in the containing theca, is, at present, the
subject of doubt and conjecture. But although, at present, uninformed as to the precise nature of the disease,
still it ought not to be considered as one against which
there exists no countervailing remedy.
On the contrary, there appears to be sufﬁcient reason
for hoping that some remedial process may ere long be
discovered, by which, at least, the progress of the disease may be stopped. It seldom happens that the agitation extends beyond the arms within the ﬁrst two
years; which period, therefore, if we were disposed to
divide the disease into stages, might be said to comprise
the ﬁrst stage. In this period, it is very probable, that
remedial means might be employed with success: and
even, if unfortunately deferred to a later period, they
might then arrest the farther progress of the disease, although the removing of the effects already produced,
might be hardly to be expected.
From a review of the changes which had taken place
in the case of Count de Lordat, it seems as if we were
able to trace the order and mode in which the morbid
changes may proceed in this disease. From any occasional cause, the thecal ligament, the membranes, or the
medulla itself, may pass into the state of simple excitement or irritation, which may be gradually succeeded
by such a local afﬂux and determination of blood into
the minute vessels, as may terminate in actual but slow
inﬂammation. The result of this would be a thickening
of the theca, or membranes, and perhaps an increase in
the volume of the medulla itself, which would gradually
occasion such a degree of pressure against the sides of
the unyielding canal, as must eventually intercept the
inﬂuence of the brain upon the inferior portion of the

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
medullary column, and upon the parts on which the
nerves of this portion are disposed.
From this review, and assuming that the morbid
changes in this disease may not be widely dissimilar
from those which occurred in the case of Count de Lordat, the chance of relief from the proposed mode of
treatment may appear to be sufﬁcient to warrant its trial.
In such a case then, at whatever period of the disease
it might be proposed to attempt the cure, blood should
be ﬁrst taken from the upper part of the neck, unless
contra-indicated by any particular circumstance. After
which vesicatories should be applied to the same part,
and a purulent discharge obtained by appropriate use
of the Sabine Liniment: having recourse to the application of a fresh blister, when from the diminution of the
discharging surface, pus is not secreted in a sufﬁcient
quantity. Should the blisters be found too inconvenient,
or a sufﬁcient quantity of discharge not be obtained
thereby, an issue of at least an inch and a half in length
might be established on each side of the vertebral columna, in its superior part. These, it is presumed, would
be best formed with caustic, and kept open with any
proper substance.*
Could it have been imagined that such considerable
beneﬁt: indeed, that such astonishing cures, could have
been effected by issues in cases of Palsy of the lower
extremities from diseased spine? although satisﬁed with
ascribing those cases to scrofulous action, we are in fact
as little informed respecting the nature of the affection,
inducing the carious state of the vertebrae, as we are
respecting the peculiar change of structure which takes
place in this disease. Equally uninformed are we also as
to the peculiar kind of morbid action, which takes place
in the ligaments of the joints; as well as that which takes
place in different instances of deep seated pains and affections of the parts contained in the head, thorax, and
abdomen, and in all which cases the inducing of a purulent discharge in their neighbourhood is so frequently
productive of a cure. Experiment has not indeed been
yet employed to prove, but analogy certainly warrants
the hope, that similar advantages might be derived from
the use of the means enumerated, in the present disease.
It is obvious, that the chance of obtaining relief will depend in a great measure on the period at which the
means are employed. As in every other disease, so here,
the earlier the remedies are resorted to, the greater will
be the probability of success. But in this disease there is
one circumstance which demands particular attention;
the long period to which it may be extended. One of its

peculiar symptoms, Scelotyrbe festinans, may not occur
until the disease has existed ten or twelve years, or
more; hence, when looking for the period, within which
our hopes of remedial aid is to be limited; we may,
guided by the slow progress of the malady, extend it to
a great length, when compared with that within which
we should be obliged to conﬁned ourselves in most
other diseases.
But it is much to be apprehended, as in many other
cases, that the resolution of the patients will seldom be
sufﬁcient to enable them to persevere through the length
of time which the proposed process will necessarily require. As slow as is the progress of the disease, so slow
in all probability must be the period of the return to
health. In most cases, especially in those in which the
disease has been allowed to exist long unopposed, it
may be found that all that art is capable of accomplishing, is that of checking its further progress. Nor will this
be regarded as a triﬂe, when, by reference to the history
of the disease, is seen the train of harassing evils which
would be thus avoided.
But it seems as if there existed reason for hoping for
more. For supposing change of structure to have taken
place, it is extremely probable that this change may be
merely increase in mass or volume by interstitial addition, the consequence of increased action in the minute
vessels of the part. In that case, should the instituting of
a purulent discharge, in a neighbouring part, act in the
manner which we would presume it may—should it by
keeping up a constant discharge, not merely alter the
determination, but diminish the inordinate action of the
vessels in the diseased part; and at the same time excite
the absorbents to such increased action as may remove
the added matter; there will exist strong ground for
hope, that a happy, though slow restoration to health,
may be obtained.
Until we are better informed respecting the nature of
this disease, the employment of internal medicines is
scarcely warrantable; unless analogy should point out
some remedy the trial of which rational hope might authorize. Particular circumstances indeed must arise in different cases, in which the aid of medicine may be demanded: and the intelligent will never fail to avail
themselves of any opportunity of making trial of the inﬂuence of mercury, which has in so many instances, manifested its power in correcting derangement of structure.
The weakened powers of the muscles in the affected
parts is so prominent a symptom, as to be very liable to
mislead the inattentive, who may regard the disease as

*Cork, which has been hitherto neglected, appears to be very appropriate to this purpose. It possesses lightness, softness, elasticity and sufﬁcient
ﬁrmness; and is also capable of being readily fashioned to any convenient form. The form which it seems could be best adapted to the part, is
that of an almond, or of the variety of bean called scarlet bean; but at least an inch and a half in length.

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

235

NEUROPSYCHIATRY CLASSICS
a mere consequence of constitutional debility. If this notion be pursued, and tonic medicines, and highly nutritious diet be directed, no beneﬁt is likely to be thus obtained; since the disease depends not on general
weakness, but merely on the interruption of the ﬂow of
the nervous inﬂuence to the affected parts.
It is indeed much to be regretted that this malady is
generally regarded by the sufferers in this point of view,
so discouraging to the employment of remedial means.
Seldom occurring before the age of ﬁfty, and frequently
yielding but little inconvenience for several months, it is
generally considered as the irremediable diminution of
the nervous inﬂuence, naturally resulting from declining
life; and remedies therefore are seldom sought for.
Although unable to trace the connection by which a
disordered state of the stomach and bowels may induce
a morbid action in a part of the medulla spinalis, yet
taught by the instruction of Mr. Abernethy, little hesitation need be employed before we determine on the
probability of such occurrence. The power, possessed by
sympathy, of inducing such disordered action in a distant part, and the probability of such disordered action
producing derangement of structure, can hardly be denied. The following Case seems to prove, at least, that
the mysterious sympathetic inﬂuence which so closely
simulates the forms of other diseases, may induce such
symptoms as would seem to menace the formation of a
disease not unlike to that which we have been here treating of.
A.B. A man, 54 years of age, of temperate habits and
regular state of bowels, became gradually affected with
slight numbness and prickling, with a feeling of weakness in both arms, accompanied by a sense of fulness
about the shoulders, as if produced by the pressure of a

236

strong ligature; and at times a slight trembling of the
hands. During the night, the fullness, numbness, and
prickling were much increased. The appetite had been
diminished for several weeks; and the abdomen, on being examined, felt as though containing considerable accumulation.
Before adopting any other measures, and as there appeared to be no marks of vascular fullness, it was determined to empty the bowels. This was done effectually
by moderate doses of calomel, with the occasional help
of Epsom salts; and in about ten days, by these means
alone, the complaints were entirely removed.
Before concluding these pages, it may be proper to
observe once more, that an important object proposed
to be obtained by them is, the leading of the attention
of those who humanely employ anatomical examination
in detecting the causes and nature of diseases, particularly to this malady. By their benevolent labours its real
nature may be ascertained, and appropriate modes of
relief, or even of cure, pointed out.
To such researches the healing art is already much
indebted for the enlargement of its powers of lessening
the evils of suffering humanity. Little is the public aware
of the obligations it owes to those who, led by professional ardour, and the dictates of duty, have devoted
themselves to these pursuits, under circumstances most
unpleasant and forbidding. Every person of consideration and feeling, may judge of the advantages yielded
by the philanthropic exertions of a Howard; but how
few can estimate the beneﬁts bestowed on mankind, by
the labours of a Morgagni, Hunter, or Baillie.
FINIS.

J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 14:2, Spring 2002

