Cell Cycle

ISSN: 1538-4101 (Print) 1551-4005 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/kccy20

REST and CoREST are transcriptional and
epigenetic regulators of seminal neural fate
decisions
Irfan A. Qureshi, Solen Gokhan & Mark F. Mehler
To cite this article: Irfan A. Qureshi, Solen Gokhan & Mark F. Mehler (2010) REST and CoREST
are transcriptional and epigenetic regulators of seminal neural fate decisions , Cell Cycle, 9:22,
4477-4486, DOI: 10.4161/cc.9.22.13973
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.9.22.13973

Published online: 15 Nov 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 588

Citing articles: 57 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kccy20

REVIEW

review

Cell Cycle 9:22, 4477-4486; November 15, 2010; © 2010 Landes Bioscience

REST and CoREST are transcriptional and
epigenetic regulators of seminal neural fate
decisions
Irfan A. Qureshi,1-3,6 Solen Gokhan1-3,6 and Mark F. Mehler1-6,*
3

1
Rosyln and Leslie Goldstein Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine; 2Institute for Brain Disorders and Neural Regeneration;
Departments of Neurology, 4Neuroscience, 5Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences; 6Rose F. Kennedy Center for Research on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities;
Albert Einstein College of Medicine; Bronx, NY USA

Key words: cell fate, CoREST, gliogenesis, neural stem cell, neurogenesis, neuronal subtype, REST/NRSF
Abbreviations: bps, base pairs; BMP, bone morphogenic protein; CREB, cAMP response element-binding protein; cRE1, canonical
RE1 motif; CoREST, corepressor for element-1-silencing transcription factor; dsNRSE, double-stranded neuron-restrictive silencing
element; ESC, embryonic stem cell; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HLH, helix-loop-helix; HD, homeodomain; lncRNA, long noncoding RNA; miRNA, microRNA; ncRE1, non-canonical RE1 motif; NRSF, neuron-restrictive silencer factor; NSC, neural stem
cell; OL, oligodendrocyte; PcG, polycomb group; RA, retinoic acid; RE1, repressor element-1; REST, RE1 silencing transcription
factor; SHH, sonic hedgehog

Complementary transcriptional and epigenetic regulatory
factors (e.g., histone and chromatin modifying enzymes and
non-coding RNAs) regulate genes responsible for mediating
neural stem cell maintenance and lineage restriction, neuronal
and glial lineage specification and progressive stages of
lineage maturation. However, an overall understanding of
the mechanisms that sense and integrate developmental
signals at the genomic level and control cell type-specific gene
network deployment has not emerged. REST and CoREST are
central players in the transcriptional and epigenetic regulatory
circuitry that is responsible for modulating neural genes,
and they have been implicated in establishing cell identity
and function, both within the nervous system and beyond
it. Herein, we discuss the emerging context-specific roles of
REST and CoREST and highlight our recent studies aimed at
elucidating their neural developmental cell type- and stagespecific actions. These observations support the conclusion
that REST and CoREST act as master regulators of key neural
cell fate decisions.

Introduction
In 1995, two laboratories simultaneously reported the identification of the repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor/
neuron-restrictive silencer factor (REST/NRSF).1,2 REST was
initially implicated in the repression of genes containing the 21
*Correspondence to: Mark F. Mehler; Email: mark.mehler@einstein.yu.edu
Submitted: 10/15/10; Accepted: 10/18/10
Previously published online:
www.landesbioscience.com/journals/cc/article/13973
DOI: 10.4161/cc.9.22.13973

www.landesbioscience.com

base pair repressor element 1/neuron restrictive silencer element
(RE1/NRSE) cis-regulatory DNA sequence. These RE1 motifassociated genes included many neuron-specific genes, such as
those encoding ion channels, neurotransmitter receptors, and
neurosecretory factors.3 Outside of the nervous system, REST
expression was detected ubiquitously in mouse embryos.1 Within
the developing nervous system, REST was detected in neural
progenitor cells but not in mature neurons.2 These initial observations seemed to suggest that REST acts as a repressor of RE1
motif-associated neuronal gene expression in non-neural, neural
stem/progenitor and non-neuronal cells and further that it serves
as a master regulator of neurogenesis.
Our knowledge of REST and its actions has expanded significantly since its discovery. We now recognize that the complex
biology of REST includes the potential for it to interact directly
or indirectly with a broad and increasing array of transcriptional
and epigenetic regulatory cofactors (including CoREST4), to be
alternatively spliced and differentially transported between the
nucleus and cytoplasm,5 to promote gene activation in addition
to repression and long-term gene silencing,6,7 to modify the epigenetic status of target gene loci distinct from effects on transcription,8,9 to modulate genes not associated with the canonical
RE1 motif,10 and to exhibit high levels of integration with noncoding RNA networks that, among other things, mediate cell
identity.11 This remarkable flexibility in all aspects of REST
regulation is consistent with our emerging appreciation for
the decidedly context-specific effects of REST for establishing
and maintaining cell identity and function. Indeed, REST and
CoREST seem to play important roles in a growing number of
normal and pathological cell types, including embryonic stem
cells (ESCs)12-18 and cancer19-28 cells. In this review, we focus on
understanding the evolving roles of REST and CoREST in transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of seminal neural cell fate
decisions.

Cell Cycle

4477

Neural Developmental Processes
Including Neural Cell Fate Determination
Neural stem cells (NSCs) and their progeny have been the focus
of numerous studies aimed at characterizing the molecular
mechanisms that orchestrate self-renewal, proliferation, lineage
restriction, neuronal and glial lineage specification, progressive
maturation and terminal differentiation. Included in these investigations is a quest to determine the regulatory logic for promoting the elaboration of diverse regional neuronal as well as glial
cell subtypes and for mediating the complementary processes
of progressive oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage maturation and
myelination, neuronal-glial interactions and neural connectivity.
These studies have begun to define the temporal and spatial profiles of gradient morphogens, cytokines, growth factors, cell-cell
signaling cues and combinatorial transcription factor codes that
establish neural cell identity and control the elaboration of both
neuronal and glial lineages from distinct regional NSC subpopulations contained within the neuraxis.29,30 Gradient morphogens,
such as sonic hedgehog (SHH) and bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs), induce patterning genes in specific areas of the developing neural tube. In ventral domains, SHH establishes a characteristic profile of homeodomain (HD) and basic helix-loop-helix
(HLH) transcription factor expression, whereas BMPs mediate
a complementary developmental program in the dorsal aspect
of the neural tube. Rostrocaudal patterning occurs in a similar
manner. Noggin, chordin and follistatin act as inductive signals
for forebrain, whereas fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and retinoic acid (RA) represent inductive signals for hindbrain regions.
These patterning and lineage specific genes establish discrete progenitor domains through cross-repressive interactions that define
the identities of individual neural progenitor species and promote
the subsequent elaboration of specific neuronal and glial subtypes.
These developmental cues, such as Notch signaling, promote the
sequential expression of transcription factor codes that coordinate progressive stages of neuronal and glial lineage elaboration.
These combinatorial transcription factor codes include inhibitory
HLH transcriptional regulators (Hes/Hey and Id), which interact with other basic HLH and HD genes.31 Dynamic changes
in the deployment and redeployment of different combinations
and permutations of transcription factors mediate downstream
developmental programs, including terminal differentiation and
neural network integration.32
More recently, epigenetic mechanisms have emerged as an
novel molecular interface for integrating cues from these diverse
cell intrinsic, cell-cell associated and environmental signaling
pathways and, in turn, for regulating the deployment of specific
gene networks that determine neural cell identity. These developmental processes may be mediated through context-dependent
gene activation, repression, long-term silencing, graded and
coordinate gene expression, establishment of epigenetic memory
states and dynamic changes in nuclear architecture. Indeed, an
increasing number of studies have begun to uncover how epigenetic processes, such as DNA methylation, histone modifications
and chromatin remodeling and short and long non-coding RNAs
(ncRNA) regulation, are responsible for promoting neural cell

4478

type- and developmental stage-specific gene expression profiles
and thus, for mediating seminal neural cell fate decisions.33-35
How transcriptional and epigenetic processes, including those
mediated by REST and CoREST, promote key neural developmental events has been the focus of intensive investigations.
REST and CoREST in Developmental Processes
Studies examining the expression, regulation and function of
REST suggest a spectrum of developmental roles. In fact, the
phenotype exhibited by REST knockout mice clearly establishes
that REST is required for embryogenesis, although an integrated
understanding of its actions during this process is still emerging.
REST knockout animals display malformations in non-neural
and neural tissues with lethality at embryonic day 11.5 associated
with complex profiles of neural gene deregulation. These wideranging abnormalities are potentially explained by the fact that
REST is implicated in a range of development processes, from
patterning of ectoderm36 to neuronal maturation (i.e., axon pathfinding).37 In addition, REST is modulated by multiple developmental cues, including patterning and specification factors (e.g.,
RA, BMP and WNT).38,39 These observations imply that REST
acts as a regulator of multiple stages of embryonic and neural
development through precise regulation of neural developmental
genes.
Less is known about the developmental functions of CoREST
than those of REST. However, there is evidence to suggest that
CoREST has not only cooperative but also distinct roles in mediating neural cell identity. For example, CoREST expression is
highly developmentally regulated, found more selectively in the
embryonic nervous system compared to REST and downregulated at the time of birth.40-43 Further, CoREST is more evolutionarily conserved than REST.41 These observations suggest that
CoREST may have more primordial functions in neural gene
regulation.
REST and CoREST as Highly Flexible Transcriptional
and Epigenetic Regulatory Factors
REST acts as a modular scaffold for the recruitment of a diverse
array of transcriptional and epigenetic factors and macromolecular complexes to specific genomic loci. CoREST binds to the
C-terminal domain of REST.4 In turn, CoREST recruits histone deacetylases, HDAC1 and HDAC2; methyl-CpG binding
protein 2, MECP2; histone demethylase, LSD1; histone methyltransferases, G9a and Suv39 h1; zinc finger proteins, ZNF198
and ZNF217; the acetyltransferase, Esco2; and components of
the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex, BAF57, BRG1
and BAF170. Similarly, mSin3 binds to the N-terminal domain
of REST and also recruits histone deacetylases, HDAC1 and
HDAC2. Furthermore, it is increasingly being recognized that
REST and/or CoREST have the potential to interact with a large
array of additional and complementary regulatory factors. These
include DNA methyltransferases; additional methyl-CpG binding domain proteins; chromatin remodeling enzymes, such as the
histone demethylase, SMCX; the chromodomain Y chromosome

Cell Cycle	Volume 9 Issue 22

family member, CDYL;20 the NADH-binding factor, CtBP; 44 the
small C-terminal domain phosphatase, Scp1; 45 and the transcription factor, Sp3.46 The identification of an increasing number of
potential interactors reveals a complex and flexible functional
repertoire of transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms well
beyond those initially envisioned for REST and CoREST.
REST also associates with Mediator, a large evolutionarily
conserved complex that is essential for mediating RNA polymerase II activity.47,48 The Mediator complex is comprised of
multiple (~26) subunits with general and specific roles in gene
regulation, including activation and repression. The mechanisms
by which Mediator affects transcription are still being characterized but include control of both pre- and post-initiation events.
Interestingly, recent studies have shown that Mediator promotes
DNA looping between gene enhancers and promoters, in concert
with cohesin.49 The profiles of Mediator and cohesin occupancy
can vary by cell type, suggesting context-specific developmental
roles. The core Mediator subunits, Med19 and Med26, interact
with REST directly and synergistically, promoting the recruitment of the entire Mediator complex to genomic RE1 sites occupied by REST.47 In turn, the Mediator complex facilitates the
recruitment of G9a to these sites, through interactions between
its Med12 subunit and G9a.50 Notably, Med12 expression is
enriched in the nervous system, where it plays a role in regulating neuronal development. In zebrafish, Med12 mutants exhibit
deficits of monoaminergic neurons and cranial sensory ganglia
through deregulation of key neural developmental genes.51 In
mouse, mosaic expression of Med12 leads to all known neural
tube defects.52 In humans, Med12 missense mutations cause the
X-linked mental retardation disorders, FG syndrome and Lujan
syndrome, by disturbing its functional interactions with REST.50
REST and CoREST complexes can independently or coordinately regulate certain gene loci. For example, some authors have
designated neuronal genes regulated by these factors as Class I or
Class II, depending on whether CoREST binds independently
to the gene promoter.53 Only the REST complex binds to Class I
gene promoters. In contrast, distinct REST and CoREST complexes bind to Class II gene promoters but at different sites. Thus,
levels of Class I gene expression are highest when REST is absent.
However, levels of activity-dependent Class II gene expression
are only sub-maximal when REST is absent because of repressive
effects from a distinct CoREST complex bound to the promoters of these genes at different sites. Although these functional
classifications are important, our understanding of genome-wide
REST and CoREST binding profiles and their site-specific and
potentially more long range effects on transcriptional and epigenetic regulation have evolved since the initial description of these
two classes.
The REST gene can be spliced into at least five distinct isoforms that may be differentially expressed, regulated, degraded
and functionally deployed.5,54-57 Each of these isoforms may have
distinct affinities for RE1 motifs. They may have individual
profiles of nuclear and cytoplasmic localization, distinct modular partners and differential effects on gene regulation. Further,
the stoichiometry of different REST isoforms may impact its
regulatory activities. For example, when REST4, a C-terminus

www.landesbioscience.com

truncated isoform, is co-expressed with other REST isoforms,
it acts in a dominant-negative fashion, competitively inhibiting
REST-induced gene silencing and promoting gene activation.54
The REST complex can function as a transcriptional repressor
or activator. A small modulatory ncRNA has been identified that
interacts directly with the REST complex and alters its behavior. This double-stranded ncRNA encodes the RE1 sequence
(dsNRSE) and is responsible for promoting RE1-associated gene
transcription.6,7 Furthermore, the presence of the dsNRSE in
certain populations of NSCs leads to their differentiation into
neuronal cells.6,7
REST and CoREST can also induce local and more longrange chromatin remodeling, distinct from their effects on transcription. For example, we recently showed that the binding of
REST to RE1 sites results in dramatic changes in nucleosome
phasing and in histone modifications.8 These included, but were
not limited to, significant reductions in profiles of histone acetylation and context-specific increases and decreases in profiles of
histone methylation. Interestingly, these REST-mediated chromatin-remodeling events were not restricted to gene promoter
regions. This finding may be consistent with previous studies
suggesting that REST and CoREST promote chromatin remodeling across extended chromosomal intervals.9
Recent studies have extended our understanding of the REST
regulome by utilizing complementary genome-wide approaches
to better characterize REST binding sites in the genome.10,15,58
These analyses have identified genomic binding sites for REST
associated with canonical RE1 (cRE1) motifs and non-canonical RE1 (ncRE1) motifs. The cRE1 motif is comprised of two
sequences that are each ten base pairs (bps) long separated by
a single non-conserved nucleotide. By contrast, ncRE1 motifs
are of variable length. These ncRE1 motifs are comprised of
two segments ten bps long separated by a variable insertion that
can be up to nine bps.10,59 These ncRE1 motif-associated genes
include many genes that are neuronal but also those that are
not. Intriguingly, it has been shown that the interaction between
REST and cRE1 motifs is strong, whereas its interaction with
other motifs is less robust, suggesting cell- or tissue-specific functions for REST in regulating these genes.60 The differential functional outcomes of REST binding to genes associated with these
different binding motifs have yet to be elucidated fully.
The functions of REST and CoREST are intimately linked
with those of at least two classes of ncRNAs—microRNAs
(miRNAs) and long ncRNAs (lncRNAs).11 miRNAs are relatively well characterized ~22 nucleotide ncRNA transcripts that
participate in post-transcriptional regulation of genes and gene
networks, through different degrees of sequence-specific interactions with cognate mRNAs resulting in translational repression
or sequestration of these transcripts. By contrast, lncRNAs are an
emerging class of ncRNAs defined as transcripts longer than 200
nucleotides. These diverse lncRNAs have a broad range of functions including the ability to modulate transcription, post-transcriptional RNA processing, translation, DNA methylation and
chromatin architecture through local and long-distance effects.61
Not surprisingly, both of these classes of ncRNAs are implicated
in mediating neural cell identity and function.34,35

Cell Cycle

4479

A number of miRNAs enriched in the nervous system are
associated with RE1 motifs and are regulated by REST.62
Moreover, REST may regulate genes that play roles in miRNA
biogenesis including Dicer1, which is associated with an RE1
motif. These observations imply that REST can modulate the
expression of miRNAs at multiple levels in their life cycles. These
regulatory relationships may be bidirectional. In fact, there are
double negative feedback loops between members of the REST
complex and the miRNAs they regulate, such as miR-124, miR-9
and miR-132.62,63 Interestingly, miR-9/miR-9* is a bifunctional
miRNA that targets REST (miR-9) and CoREST (miR-9*).63
Furthermore, many REST-regulated miRNAs are also subject
to modulation by the cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), another factor with key roles in mediating brain
development and adult neurogenesis.62 Indeed, an increasing
number of studies has highlighted the complex circuitry involving REST, CoREST, CREB and miRNAs that controls NSC
self-renewal, maintenance and differentiation.19,64,65 In addition,
a computational analysis comparing the distributions of RE1
motifs and of annotated lncRNA genes in mouse and human
genomes suggested that REST also has the potential to regulate 23% of annotated lncRNAs.66 In vitro studies performed
utilizing mouse and human tissues validated this hypothesis by
showing that REST influenced the expression of various developmentally expressed and nervous system restricted lncRNAs. For
example, AK090153 is a REST-regulated lncRNA with enriched
expression in the adult mouse pallidum (www.brain-map.org/
search.do?queryText=geneid = 143712, Allen Brain Atlas—Allen
Institute for Brain Science, Seattle). Intriguingly, one of the
critical functions of lncRNAs is to recruit REST and CoREST
complexes to specific genomic sites.67,68 We previously reported
utilizing in situ hybridization data from the Allen Brain Atlas to
identify region-, cell type- or subcellular compartment-specific
expression profiles for hundreds of lncRNAs in the adult mouse
brain.69 Other groups have identified complementary profiles of
lncRNA expression during brain development.70 Together, these
observations highlight the complex patterns of neural lncRNA
expression present during development and adult life and support the interesting possibility that REST and CoREST act more
globally as regulators of lncRNA expression. In turn, REST and
CoREST transcriptional and epigenetic regulatory functions
may be orchestrated by these lncRNAs.
Evolving Roles of REST and CoREST
in Seminal Neural Cell Fate Decisions
Previous efforts have focused on understanding the role played
by REST in regulating cell fate decisions. These have included
analyses of REST genome-wide binding profiles in various cell
lines.10,15,58 By contrast, we recently examined neural cell typeand developmental stage-specific profiles for REST and CoREST
promoter occupancy employing paradigms to generate neuronal
and glial subtypes and progressive stages of OL lineage maturation
including myelination from mouse forebrain-derived neural stem
and progenitor species.71-73 These studies are the first to report
such comprehensive and comparative genome-wide binding

4480

profiles for REST and for CoREST in primary neural cell types,
ranging from immature to mature neural lineage species. We
found thousands of occupied genomic loci including those associated with cRE1 and ncRE motifs as well as non-RE1 sites not
previously identified as targets for REST and CoREST regulation. We identified both unique and overlapping profiles for gene
promoters occupied by REST or CoREST across these cell types.
Moreover, we performed complementary gene expression analyses
within this neural developmental paradigm. Our data is the first
to correlate dynamic profiles of REST and CoREST promoter
occupancy with gene expression changes during neural lineage
elaboration. We found that REST or CoREST promoter binding
was not simply associated with gene downregulation. Rather, we
observed that transcriptional activation and repression and the
absence of significant shifts in profiles of transcription were all
possible outcomes of changes in REST and CoREST occupancy,
highlighting the complex, dynamic and flexible actions of REST
and CoREST (see above) in neural development functions. Our
overall observations suggest that REST and CoREST have the
potential to independently and coordinately regulate a very broad
range of genes and functional gene networks in an exquisitely
context-specific manner, through a spectrum of transcriptional
and epigenetic mechanisms (Fig. 1).
Examining the functions of these genes leads to the conclusion that REST and CoREST modulate diverse signaling
pathways, transcription factor codes, epigenetic networks and
associated developmental programs, all of which are at the nexus
of mediating neural cell identity and function.71-73 For example,
we observed that REST and CoREST target members of the
SHH gradient morphogen neurodevelopmental signaling pathway. These results are consistent with recent experimental work
in zebrafish, which demonstrated that REST modulates SHH
signaling.74 This study found that knocking down REST both
promotes and inhibits SHH signaling, depending on the developmental context.74 This observation once again highlights the
exquisite versatility of REST developmental functions.
We found that REST and CoREST target a large number
epigenetic factors in a cell type- and developmental stage-specific
manner, including but not limited to those that mediate DNA
methylation, histone modification, nucleosome repositioning
and higher order chromatin remodeling.71-73 These observations
are consistent with and significantly expand on previous findings
that have implicated REST in regulating chromatin modulatory
factors.10 Many of the epigenetic factors targeted by REST or
CoREST individually or in concert help to shape cell fate and
produce cellular diversity (see below). For example, REST and
CoREST target components of the cohesin complex, suggesting
roles in integrating neural enhancer and promoter functions and
more precisely regulating the differential deployment of developmental genes (see above).49 Intriguingly, many of these factors
are directly recruited by REST and CoREST complexes or indirectly participate in their functions. These observations suggest
that REST and CoREST determine cell fate through multiple
distinct mechanisms, which include modulation of epigenetic
factors at the transcriptional level and operationally through
recruitment to their macromolecular complexes.

Cell Cycle	Volume 9 Issue 22

Figure 1. This schematic illustrates the mechanisms by which REST and CoREST are responsible for the transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of
developmental gene networks underpinning neural cell fate decisions.

We also found REST and CoREST targets that are involved in
the regulation of REST and CoREST transcription, post-translational modifications and profiles of cellular degradation.71-73 For
example, both REST and CoREST bind to the RE1-containing
REST promoter in NSCs. In addition, NCoR2 and RARγ regulate transcription of REST, whereas the ubiquitin-proteosome
pathway degrades REST and sumoylation inactivates CoREST.
Autoregulation utilizing these flexible feed-forward and negative
feedback loops may confer significant sensitivity and responsivity
to REST and CoREST regulatory control systems, which seem
to be differentially exploited throughout NSC-mediated lineage
elaboration.
In addition, we found that genes targeted in a developmental stage- and cell type-specific manner encode factors that have
roles in cell surface identity and connectivity, homeostasis, stress
responses, as well as many additional cellular functions.71-73 These
observations suggest that these genes may have selective roles in
promoting a particular neural cell identity and/or repressing
alternate lineage fates.
Embryonic and neural stem cell maintenance and maturation. REST is implicated in mediating cell identity and function within a variety of cell types, including ESCs and NSCs.
It has been reported that REST is highly expressed in blastocysts and ESCs and that REST promotes the early stages of ESC
differentiation by suppressing the expression of pluripotency

www.landesbioscience.com

associated genes, such as Nanog.18 Moreover, it has been suggested that REST is even required for ESC pluripotency, however, this role for REST is controversial.75 Nonetheless, REST
transcriptional circuitry is highly integrated with that of pluripotency gene networks.17,76,77 For example, REST is a target of
the core pluripotency genes, and it may also regulate them. One
of the mechanisms by which REST is implicated in regulating
pluripotency gene networks is through effects on miRNAs (i.e.,
miR-21).17 Indeed, both miRNAs78 and lncRNAs79,80 have roles
in ESC pluripotency and differentiation. However, the potential
interrelationships between these factors and REST in ESCs have
yet to be defined fully.
The role of REST has been examined in the developmental
transition from ESCs into NSCs. REST is thought, at least in
part, to selectively silence a cohort of neuronal genes in ESCs.14
REST expression decreases with neural lineage commitment.53
Two complementary studies have shown differential REST
occupancy profiles in ESCs and NSCs and these findings suggested the presence of distinct and overlapping developmental
REST regulons.15,81 For example, one of these studies found 810
and 679 RE1 sites occupied by REST, respectively, in ESCs
and NSCs.15 These included only 32 unique sites in NSCs. This
study also suggested that REST promotes ESC-mediated neural lineage restriction by repressing a subset of neuronal differentiation genes (i.e., Scg3, Stmn3, Celsr3, Syp, Cplx1 and Syt4)

Cell Cycle

4481

but not those with roles in neural lineage specification (i.e.,
Mash1 and Math1), implying preferential REST regulation
of neuronal terminal differentiation as compared with earlier
stages of lineage specification.14,81 A different study found that
REST depletion to 1% of wild type levels prevented the formation of NSCs and neurogenesis.82 Further, these deficits could
be rescued, in part, by the extracellular matrix component, laminin, which is a target of REST regulation. These observations
suggest that REST orchestrates neural cell fate decisions at various cellular stages through multiple interrelated molecular and
cellular mechanisms.
Intriguingly, in our NSC studies, we found that REST binds
to 322 promoter sites, including those containing RE1 and nonRE1 sequences.71 Differences in the number of REST targets compared with previous studies may be explained by the utilization of
distinct cell types—more biological representative primary NSCs
as compared to NSC cell lines15 and by a wide variety of methodological considerations related to their isolation, propagation and
interrogation. We unexpectedly found that CoREST binds to a
significantly greater number of genomic sites (1,820) compared
to REST and encompassing a larger proportion of unique target
genes in NSCs.71 These included many loci encoding factors that
are part of pluripotency networks83 and individual and composite
Oct4/Sox2/Nanog transcriptional networks; 84 those with critical roles in NSC maintenance, lineage restriction and neurogenesis; those involved in epigenetic regulatory networks, including
genes targeted by brain-related miRNAs (e.g., miR-124a, miR-9
and miR-132); and those linked to specific disease states associated with deregulation of NSC functions (i.e., cancer stem cells),
including glioblastoma multiforme. By contrast, we found that
both REST and CoREST target genes included factors implicated in Huntington’s disease, a disorder linked to deregulation
of REST subcellular localization and function.85 These observations suggest that CoREST may preferentially promote NSC
maintenance and fate restriction compared to REST and that
specific core pluripotency genes may have distinct and previously
unanticipated roles in early neural development.86
Further, we performed REST and CoREST knockdown
experiments utilizing NSC clonal expansion and differentiation assays to examine their roles in mediating neural cell fate
decisions. These studies revealed that REST ablation impedes
neurogenesis, consistent with previous studies,53,82 whereas
CoREST ablation significantly impedes NSC maintenance
and altered neural fate restriction, consistent with distinct roles
for CoREST in multi-lineage potential and early neural fate
decisions.71 Moreover, our studies revealed that both REST
and CoREST participate in the process of self-renewal, possibly in a cooperative manner, as revealed by our clonal gene
ablation studies and corresponding analysis of downstream
REST and CoREST gene targets.71 Further supporting this
model, we found that the ncRE1-associated Nr2e1 (Tlx) gene is
targeted by CoREST but not REST in NSCs. Nr2e1 interacts
directly with the histone demethylase, LSD1, a member of the
CoREST complex.87 It promotes NSC maintenance, including
self-renewal.88 Nr2e1 also participates in a dual negative transcriptional feedback loop with the microRNA, miR-9,89 which

4482

also has bidirectional transcriptional regulatory relationships
with REST and CoREST.62,63
REST and CoREST may also interact with other key factors involved in NSC fate decisions, such as the Polycomb group
(PcG) proteins, Bmi1 and Ezh2, which are both implicated in
regulating NSC maintenance and self-renewal.90,91 It has been
hypothesized that PcG complexes that contain these factors (i.e.,
PRC1 and PRC2) may be recruited to their genomic sites of
action by REST.8,92,93 However, an alternative explanation may
be that these PcG proteins and REST can both be co-recruited to
these genomic sites by lncRNAs.67
Neuronal subtype specification and maturation. We performed the first study of REST and CoREST occupancy profiles
across multiple neuronal subtypes and uncovered large networks
of neuronal subtype-specific target genes.72 Intriguingly, only a
minority of these gene targets is RE1 motif-associated. Further,
REST and CoREST targeted groups of genes that are largely
non-overlapping and also distinct within each neuronal subtype.
These findings strongly suggest that REST and CoREST do not
execute “generic” neuronal transcriptional and epigenetic regulatory programs but rather are involved in sculpting profiles of
genes expression involved in terminal neuronal differentiation
and regional neuronal subtype identity, maintenance and function, with important implications for our understanding of the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases.85,94
In fact, REST and CoREST each targeted only one site across
all four neuronal subtypes that we examined. REST only targeted Ehmt1, a H3K9 methyltransferase closely related to G9a
(Ehmt2), that is thought to play a role in regulating p53,95 and
lineage-specific genes in neurons.96 Ehmt1 is linked to various
cognitive and behavioral processes in animal models96 and associated with the development of intellectual and developmental
disabilities97,98 and medulloblastoma99 in humans. CoREST only
targeted Defb42, a G9a-regulated member of the ß-defensin family of pleiotropic factors.100 REST recruits G9a to its macromolecular complex, suggesting that the association of both of these
factors with G9a is not coincidental but rather that it has a functional and regulatory impact on neurogenesis.
More generally within these neuronal subtypes, we found that
REST and CoREST targeted genes encoding members of key
neural developmental signaling pathways (e.g., FGF, RA, EGF,
Notch, BMP, SHH and WNT) and factors with roles in promoting neuronal subtype identity. For example, we identified many
target genes that are protocadherins. These factors are thought
to promote neuronal functional diversity and connectivity. We
observed that REST and CoREST targets included Pcdh15,
Pcdh18, Pcdhb4, Pcdhb5, Pcdhb7, Pcdhb10, Pcdhb14, Pcdhb16,
Pcdhb17, Pcdhb18, Pcdhb19, Pcdhb20, Pcdhb21, Pcdhb22,
Pcdhga9, Pcdhgb1 and Pcdhgb2. Our observations are consistent
with a recent functional analysis showing that REST regulates
protocadherin genes, including genes that are not associated with
an RE1 motif.101
Our distinct REST and CoREST target gene profiles in neuronal subtypes also included factors not previously associated with
the establishment of neuronal subtype identity, such as particular
epigenetic factors (e.g., Mbd6, Smcx, Jarid1d, Lsd1 and Smarce1),

Cell Cycle	Volume 9 Issue 22

cell cycle regulators (e.g., Anapc10, Cdkal1, Cdc2l1, Cdkl4
and Mad2l1) and homeostatic modulators (e.g., Arih1, Mib1,
Ubb, Ube2j1 and Ubtd1). Furthermore, we found that REST
and CoREST also targeted genes associated with neurodegenerative diseases characterized by neuronal subtype-specific profiles of cell loss. These include genes linked to Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s diseases, spinocerebellar ataxias, frontotemporal
dementia, myoclonic and dopa-responsive dystonias, pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration and hemochromatosis,
suggesting additional roles of REST and CoREST in mediating
the integrity of neuronal subtypes.
In a complementary analysis of neuronal subtype specification, we found differential expression of lncRNAs that may
also be targets of REST regulation.102 One of these, AK044422,
is a transcript previously implicated in the development of retinal cell types.103 This transcript overlaps a REST regulated
miRNA, miR-124a, but is polyadenylated, spliced and likely
to also function independently. It is therefore interesting to
speculate that REST modulates the expression not only of
miR-124a but also of AK044422.64 Mechanistically, miR-124
induces brain-specific alternative splicing by reducing levels
of the Ptbp1 splicing regulatory factor and thereby promotes
neuronal differentiation.104 An ncRE1 motif is associated with
Ptbp1 and with other splicing factors (e.g., Nova2) implying
that REST and CoREST may be involved in regulating neurogenesis through effects on alternative splicing. Ptbp1 and
AK044422 exhibit complementary expression profiles, suggesting that they may represent components of an integrated
AK044422/miR-124/Ptbp1 REST/CoREST-associated developmental gene regulatory network. These observations highlight the complex and integrated nature of REST, CoREST
and ncRNA circuitry responsible for the establishment of neuronal cell identity and developmental functions.11,105
Glial subtype specification and progressive stages of oligodendrocyte lineage maturation. We performed the first study
of REST and CoREST in developmental glial cell types and
uncovered a large network of glial-selective target genes.73 As in
neuronal subtypes, only a minority of these gene targets is RE1
motif-associated. Intriguingly, we identified a much larger cohort
of OL developmental stage-selective CoREST as compared to
REST target genes in OL precursor cells, which further implies
that CoREST plays an important, preferential and previously
unappreciated role in uncommitted immature neural cell types.
We also found that progressive stages of OL lineage maturation
are characterized by increasing numbers of target genes that are
common to REST and CoREST and shared between these OL
developmental cellular species. These observations imply that,
unlike neuronal subtype specification, which seems to employ
largely non-overlapping REST and CoREST regulatory modules, OL lineage progression seems to utilize coordinated REST
and CoREST regulatory modules. Moreover, profiles of REST
and CoREST target genes in NSCs, neuronal subtypes and glial
lineage species were largely non-overlapping, highlighting the
highly developmental context-dependent nature of REST and
CoREST genomic binding profiles. These observations imply
that largely independent REST and CoREST gene regulatory

www.landesbioscience.com

networks dynamically sculpt diverse neural fate decisions by
integrating multiple layers of cell autonomous, cell-cell associated and environmental cues.
In fact, we found that REST and CoREST targeted genes
encoding factors involved in mediating glial cell identity and
function. These included members of key developmental pathways that regulate OL specification and progressive maturation
(e.g., PDGF, SHH, MAPK and FGF) and transcription factors
responsible for governing OL lineage specification, proliferation
and terminal differentiation including myelination, such as members of the HLH (e.g., E2A, HEB, Mash1, Olig2 and Id4), Hox
(e.g., Hoxa2), POU (e.g., Brn2), Sox (e.g., Sox4, Sox8 and Sox11),
Nkx (e.g., Nkx6.1) and zinc finger (e.g., Myt1 and Zfp488) transcription factor families.
Intriguingly, in astroglial cells, we identified a larger number
of distinct REST target genes compared to CoREST target genes,
suggesting a preferential role for REST in promoting astroglial
cell identity. Our observations are consistent with a subsequent
study demonstrating that BMP signaling upregulates REST
expression which, in turn, promotes astroglial lineage specification and maintenance.39
We also identified other REST and CoREST target genes
responsible for mediating a broad array of biological processes
that may be involved in determining glial cell identity and
function. These included numerous epigenetic (e.g., Hist1 h4a,
Mbd6, Scmh1, Smarca2 and Smc4l1) and cell cycle regulatory
(e.g., Ccna2, Ccnd1, Cdc34, Cdk5r1 and Cdkn2c) genes as well
as many classes of cell surface identity (e.g., protocadherin, olfactory receptors, vomeronasal receptors and cell adhesion and additional transmembrane proteins) factors. Furthermore, REST and
CoREST also targeted genes associated with oligodendrogliopathies, including multiple sclerosis and multisystem atrophy, suggesting previously unanticipated roles for REST and CoREST in
the pathogenesis of glial disease states.
Intriguingly, in a complementary study, we also identified
a number of developmentally regulated lncRNAs transcribed
from genomic loci encompassing protein-coding genes important for OL lineage elaboration, in antisense, bidirectional or
intronic configurations relative to these genes.102 For example,
Sox8OT is a bidirectional lncRNA differentially expressed during OL lineage maturation that is associated with Sox8, a RE1associated gene that plays key roles in OL differentiation. We
found that REST and CoREST targeted the Sox8 promoter in
post-mitotic and myelinating OLs, raising the intriguing possibility that REST and CoREST may coordinately regulate the
bidirectional transcripts, Sox8 and Sox8OT. In addition, REST
may also regulate miRNAs that are important for OL lineage
elaboration. For example, the miR-9 is downregulated during
OL differentiation.106 In addition, miR-9/9* has a bidirectional
regulatory relationship with REST and CoREST, 63 highlighting the complex gene regulatory relationships that may
underpin OL lineage elaboration. These overall observations
highlight the potential importance of REST and CoREST in
mediating the dynamic transcriptional and epigenetic modulation of neural fate decisions through the actions of short and
long ncRNAs.

Cell Cycle

4483

Conclusion
Individual transcriptional and epigenetic states define cell identity and function in the nervous system.94,107 Progressive changes
in profiles of gene activation and repression, long-term gene
silencing and hierarchies of epigenetic modifications (including alterations at single genomic loci as well as those that are
genome-wide and associated with nuclear reorganization108) that
occur in response to discreet cell autonomous, cell-cell and environmental signals are therefore responsible for mediating neural lineage elaboration. Individual and cooperative REST and
CoREST complexes with distinct macromolecular assemblies
are likely deployed in a genome-wide and cell type-specific manner; are key nodes in the regulatory circuitry mediating diverse
transcriptional, post-transcriptional, as well as local- and longdistance epigenetic processes; and are highly integrated with
neural developmental signaling and effector pathways. Thus,
REST and CoREST appear to define the overall transcriptional
References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

Chong JA, Tapia-Ramirez J, Kim S, Toledo-Aral JJ,
Zheng Y, Boutros MC, et al. REST: A mammalian silencer protein that restricts sodium channel gene
expression to neurons. Cell 1995; 80:949-57.
Schoenherr CJ, Anderson DJ. The neuron-restrictive
silencer factor (NRSF): A coordinate repressor of multiple neuron-specific genes. Science 1995; 267:1360-3.
Schoenherr CJ, Paquette AJ, Anderson DJ.
Identification of potential target genes for the neuronrestrictive silencer factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1996; 93:9881-6.
Andres ME, Burger C, Peral-Rubio MJ, Battaglioli
E, Anderson ME, Grimes J, et al. CoREST: A functional corepressor required for regulation of neuralspecific gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;
96:9873-8.
Shimojo M. Characterization of the nuclear targeting
signal of REST/NRSF. Neurosci Lett 2006; 398:161-6.
Kuwabara T, Hsieh J, Nakashima K, Taira K, Gage FH.
A small modulatory dsRNA specifies the fate of adult
neural stem cells. Cell 2004; 116:779-93.
Kuwabara T, Hsieh J, Nakashima K, Warashina M,
Taira K, Gage FH. The NRSE smRNA specifies the
fate of adult hippocampal neural stem cells. Nucleic
Acids Symp Ser (Oxf ) 2005; 87-8.
Zheng D, Zhao K, Mehler MF. Profiling RE1/RESTmediated histone modifications in the human genome.
Genome Biol 2009; 10:9.
Lunyak VV, Burgess R, Prefontaine GG, Nelson C, Sze
SH, Chenoweth J, et al. Corepressor-dependent silencing of chromosomal regions encoding neuronal genes.
Science 2002; 298:1747-52.
Otto SJ, McCorkle SR, Hover J, Conaco C, Han JJ,
Impey S, et al. A new binding motif for the transcriptional repressor REST uncovers large gene networks
devoted to neuronal functions. J Neurosci 2007;
27:6729-39.
Qureshi IA, Mehler MF. Regulation of non-coding
RNA networks in the nervous system—what’s the
REST of the story? Neurosci Lett 2009; 466:73-80.
Dovey OM, Foster CT, Cowley SM. Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), but not HDAC2, controls embryonic
stem cell differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010;
107:8242-7.
Foster CT, Dovey OM, Lezina L, Luo JL, Gant
TW, Barlev N, et al. Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1
Regulates the Embryonic Transcriptome and CoREST
Stability. Mol Cell Biol 2010; 30:4851-63.

4484

and epigenetic status of individual neural cell types and modulate
the robustness, plasticity and responsivity of these states in the
context of neural cell fate decisions (Fig. 1). Better characterizing
how REST and CoREST promote transcriptional and epigenetic
programming of neural cell identity and function has important
implications for understanding neural development and disease
states associated with CoREST or REST (e.g., neurodevelopmental50,93,97,98,109 and neurodegenerative63,85,110-112 disorders, epilepsy,44,113 stroke114,115 and cancer19-28) and for promoting more
effective neural regeneration.
Acknowledgements

We regret that space constraints have prevented the citation of
many relevant and important references. M.F.M. is supported
by grants from the National Institutes of Health (NS38902,
MH66290, NS071571), as well as by the Roslyn and Leslie
Goldstein, the Mildred and Bernard H. Kayden, the F.M. Kirby
and the Alpern Family Foundations.

14. Jorgensen HF, Terry A, Beretta C, Pereira CF, Leleu M,
Chen ZF, et al. REST selectively represses a subset of
RE1-containing neuronal genes in mouse embryonic
stem cells. Development 2009; 136:715-21.
15. Johnson R, Teh CH, Kunarso G, Wong KY, Srinivasan
G, Cooper ML, et al. REST regulates distinct transcriptional networks in embryonic and neural stem cells.
PLoS Biol 2008; 6:256.
16. Canzonetta C, Mulligan C, Deutsch S, Ruf S,
O’Doherty A, Lyle R, et al. DYRK1A-dosage imbalance perturbs NRSF/REST levels, deregulating pluripotency and embryonic stem cell fate in Down
syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 2008; 83:388-400.
17. Singh SK, Kagalwala MN, Parker-Thornburg J, Adams
H, Majumder S. REST maintains self-renewal and
pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. Nature 2008;
453:223-7.
18. Yamada Y, Aoki H, Kunisada T, Hara A. Rest promotes
the early differentiation of mouse ESCs but is not
required for their maintenance. Cell Stem Cell 2010;
6:10-5.
19. Westbrook TF, Hu G, Ang XL, Mulligan P, Pavlova
NN, Liang A, et al. SCFbeta-TRCP controls oncogenic transformation and neural differentiation through
REST degradation. Nature 2008; 452:370-4.
20. Mulligan P, Westbrook TF, Ottinger M, Pavlova N,
Chang B, Macia E, et al. CDYL bridges REST and
histone methyltransferases for gene repression and
suppression of cellular transformation. Mol Cell 2008;
32:718-26.
21. Guardavaccaro D, Frescas D, Dorrello NV, Peschiaroli
A, Multani AS, Cardozo T, et al. Control of chromosome stability by the beta-TrCP-REST-Mad2 axis.
Nature 2008; 452:365-9.
22. Su X, Gopalakrishnan V, Stearns D, Aldape K, Lang
FF, Fuller G, et al. Abnormal expression of REST/
NRSF and Myc in neural stem/progenitor cells causes
cerebellar tumors by blocking neuronal differentiation.
Mol Cell Biol 2006; 26:1666-78.
23. Majumder S. REST in good times and bad: roles in
tumor suppressor and oncogenic activities. Cell Cycle
2006; 5:1929-35.
24. Blom T, Tynninen O, Puputti M, Halonen M, Paetau
A, Haapasalo H, et al. Molecular genetic analysis of
the REST/NRSF gene in nervous system tumors. Acta
Neuropathol 2006; 112:483-90.
25. Westbrook TF, Martin ES, Schlabach MR, Leng Y,
Liang AC, Feng B, et al. A genetic screen for candidate tumor suppressors identifies REST. Cell 2005;
121:837-48.

26. Fuller GN, Su X, Price RE, Cohen ZR, Lang FF,
Sawaya R, et al. Many human medulloblastoma tumors
overexpress repressor element-1 silencing transcription
(REST)/neuron-restrictive silencer factor, which can be
functionally countered by REST-VP16. Mol Cancer
Ther 2005; 4:343-9.
27. Coulson JM. Transcriptional regulation: cancer, neurons and the REST. Curr Biol 2005; 15:665-8.
28. Lawinger P, Venugopal R, Guo ZS, Immaneni A,
Sengupta D, Lu W, et al. The neuronal repressor
REST/NRSF is an essential regulator in medulloblastoma cells. Nat Med 2000; 6:826-31.
29. Guillemot F. Cell fate specification in the mammalian
telencephalon. Prog Neurobiol 2007; 83:37-52.
30. Dessaud E, McMahon AP, Briscoe J. Pattern formation in the vertebrate neural tube: a sonic hedgehog morphogen-regulated transcriptional network.
Development 2008; 135:2489-503.
31. Mehler MF. Mechanisms regulating lineage diversity
during mammalian cerebral cortical neurogenesis and
gliogenesis. Results Probl Cell Differ 2002; 39:27-52.
32. Gokhan S, Marin-Husstege M, Yung SY, Fontanez
D, Casaccia-Bonnefil P, Mehler MF. Combinatorial
profiles of oligodendrocyte-selective classes of transcriptional regulators differentially modulate myelin basic
protein gene expression. J Neurosci 2005; 25:8311-21.
33. Hirabayashi Y, Gotoh Y. Epigenetic control of neural precursor cell fate during development. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2010; 11:377-88.
34. Li X, Jin P. Roles of small regulatory RNAs in determining neuronal identity. Nat Rev Neurosci 2010;
11:329-38.
35. Qureshi IA, Mattick JS, Mehler MF. Long non-coding
RNAs in nervous system function and disease. Brain
Res 2010; 1338:20-35.
36. Olguin P, Oteiza P, Gamboa E, Gomez-Skarmeta JL,
Kukuljan M. RE-1 silencer of transcription/neural
restrictive silencer factor modulates ectodermal patterning during Xenopus development. J Neurosci 2006;
26:2820-9.
37. Paquette AJ, Perez SE, Anderson DJ. Constitutive
expression of the neuron-restrictive silencer factor
(NRSF)/REST in differentiating neurons disrupts
neuronal gene expression and causes axon pathfinding errors in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;
97:12318-23.
38. Nishihara S, Tsuda L, Ogura T. The canonical Wnt
pathway directly regulates NRSF/REST expression
in chick spinal cord. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2003; 311:55-63.

Cell Cycle	Volume 9 Issue 22

39. Kohyama J, Sanosaka T, Tokunaga A, Takatsuka E,
Tsujimura K, Okano H, et al. BMP-induced REST
regulates the establishment and maintenance of astrocytic identity. J Cell Biol 2010; 189:159-70.
40. Grimes JA, Nielsen SJ, Battaglioli E, Miska EA, Speh
JC, Berry DL, et al. The co-repressor mSin3A is a
functional component of the REST-CoREST repressor
complex. J Biol Chem 2000; 275:9461-7.
41. Lakowski B, Roelens I, Jacob S. CoREST-like complexes regulate chromatin modification and neuronal
gene expression. J Mol Neurosci 2006; 29:227-39.
42. de la Calle-Mustienes E, Modolell J, Gomez-Skarmeta
JL. The Xiro-repressed gene CoREST is expressed in
Xenopus neural territories. Mech Dev 2002; 110:209-11.
43. Tontsch S, Zach O, Bauer HC. Identification and localization of M-CoREST (1A13), a mouse homologue of
the human transcriptional co-repressor CoREST, in the
developing mouse CNS. Mech Dev 2001; 108:165-9.
44. Garriga-Canut M, Schoenike B, Qazi R, Bergendahl
K, Daley TJ, Pfender RM, et al. 2-Deoxy-D-glucose
reduces epilepsy progression by NRSF-CtBPdependent metabolic regulation of chromatin structure.
Nat Neurosci 2006; 9:1382-7.
45. Visvanathan J, Lee S, Lee B, Lee JW, Lee SK. The
microRNA miR-124 antagonizes the anti-neural
REST/SCP1 pathway during embryonic CNS development. Genes Dev 2007; 21:744-9.
46. Kim CS, Choi HS, Hwang CK, Song KY, Lee BK, Law
PY, et al. Evidence of the neuron-restrictive silencer
factor (NRSF) interaction with Sp3 and its synergic
repression to the mu opioid receptor (MOR) gene.
Nucleic Acids Res 2006; 34:6392-403.
47. Ding N, Tomomori-Sato C, Sato S, Conaway RC,
Conaway JW, Boyer TG. MED19 and MED26 are
synergistic functional targets of the RE1 silencing transcription factor in epigenetic silencing of neuronal gene
expression. J Biol Chem 2009; 284:2648-56.
48. Taatjes DJ. The human Mediator complex: A versatile, genome-wide regulator of transcription. Trends
Biochem Sci 2010; 35:315-22.
49. Kagey MH, Newman JJ, Bilodeau S, Zhan Y, Orlando
DA, van Berkum NL, et al. Mediator and cohesin
connect gene expression and chromatin architecture.
Nature 2010; 467:430-5.
50. Ding N, Zhou H, Esteve PO, Chin HG, Kim S, Xu X,
et al. Mediator links epigenetic silencing of neuronal
gene expression with x-linked mental retardation. Mol
Cell 2008; 31:347-59.
51. Wang X, Yang N, Uno E, Roeder RG, Guo S. A
subunit of the mediator complex regulates vertebrate
neuronal development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006;
103:17284-9.
52. Rocha PP, Bleiss W, Schrewe H. Mosaic expression
of Med12 in female mice leads to exencephaly, spina
bifida and craniorachischisis. Birt Defects Res A Clin
Mol Teratol 2010; 88:626-32.
53. Ballas N, Grunseich C, Lu DD, Speh JC, Mandel G.
REST and its corepressors mediate plasticity of neuronal gene chromatin throughout neurogenesis. Cell
2005; 121:645-57.
54. Tabuchi A, Yamada T, Sasagawa S, Naruse Y, Mori
N, Tsuda M. REST4-mediated modulation of REST/
NRSF-silencing function during BDNF gene promoter
activation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;
290:415-20.
55. Lee JH, Shimojo M, Chai YG, Hersh LB. Studies on
the interaction of REST4 with the cholinergic repressor
element-1/neuron restrictive silencer element. Brain
Res Mol Brain Res 2000; 80:88-98.
56. Lee JH, Chai YG, Hersh LB. Expression patterns of
mouse repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor 4 (REST4) and its possible function in neuroblastoma. J Mol Neurosci 2000; 15:205-14.
57. Shimojo M, Paquette AJ, Anderson DJ, Hersh LB.
Protein kinase A regulates cholinergic gene expression
in PC12 cells: REST4 silences the silencing activity of
neuron-restrictive silencer factor/REST. Mol Cell Biol
1999; 19:6788-95.

www.landesbioscience.com

58. Johnson DS, Mortazavi A, Myers RM, Wold B.
Genome-wide mapping of in vivo protein-DNA interactions. Science 2007; 316:1497-502.
59. Johnson R, Gamblin RJ, Ooi L, Bruce AW, Donaldson
IJ, Westhead DR, et al. Identification of the REST
regulon reveals extensive transposable element-mediated binding site duplication. Nucleic Acids Res 2006;
34:3862-77.
60. Bruce AW, Lopez-Contreras AJ, Flicek P, Down TA,
Dhami P, Dillon SC, et al. Functional diversity for
REST (NRSF) is defined by in vivo binding affinity
hierarchies at the DNA sequence level. Genome Res
2009; 19:994-1005.
61. Mattick JS, Amaral PP, Dinger ME, Mercer TR,
Mehler MF. RNA regulation of epigenetic processes.
Bioessays 2009; 31:51-9.
62. Wu J, Xie X. Comparative sequence analysis reveals an
intricate network among REST, CREB and miRNA
in mediating neuronal gene expression. Genome Biol
2006; 7:85.
63. Packer AN, Xing Y, Harper SQ, Jones L, Davidson
BL. The bifunctional microRNA miR-9/miR-9* regulates REST and CoREST and is downregulated in
Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci 2008; 28:14341-6.
64. Conaco C, Otto S, Han JJ, Mandel G. Reciprocal
actions of REST and a microRNA promote neuronal
identity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:2422-7.
65. Laneve P, Gioia U, Andriotto A, Moretti F, Bozzoni
I, Caffarelli E. A minicircuitry involving REST and
CREB controls miR-9-2 expression during human
neuronal differentiation. Nucleic Acids Res 2010.
66. Johnson R, Teh CH, Jia H, Vanisri RR, Pandey T, Lu
ZH, et al. Regulation of neural macroRNAs by the
transcriptional repressor REST. RNA 2009; 15:85-96.
67. Tsai MC, Manor O, Wan Y, Mosammaparast N, Wang
JK, Lan F, et al. Long noncoding RNA as modular scaffold of histone modification complexes. Science 2010;
329:689-93.
68. Khalil AM, Guttman M, Huarte M, Garber M, Raj A,
Rivea Morales D, et al. Many human large intergenic
noncoding RNAs associate with chromatin-modifying
complexes and affect gene expression. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2009; 106:11667-72.
69. Mercer TR, Dinger ME, Sunkin SM, Mehler MF,
Mattick JS. Specific expression of long noncoding
RNAs in the mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2008; 105:716-21.
70. Ponjavic J, Oliver PL, Lunter G, Ponting CP. Genomic
and transcriptional co-localization of protein-coding
and long non-coding RNA pairs in the developing
brain. PLoS Genet 2009; 5:1000617.
71. Abrajano JJ, Qureshi IA, Gokhan S, Molero AE, Zheng
D, Bergman A, et al. Corepressor for element-1-silencing transcription factor preferentially mediates gene
networks underlying neural stem cell fate decisions.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107:16685-90.
72. Abrajano JJ, Qureshi IA, Gokhan S, Zheng D, Bergman
A, Mehler MF. REST and CoREST modulate neuronal
subtype specification, maturation and maintenance.
PLoS ONE 2009; 4:7936.
73. Abrajano JJ, Qureshi IA, Gokhan S, Zheng D,
Bergman A, Mehler MF. Differential deployment of
REST and CoREST promotes glial subtype specification and oligodendrocyte lineage maturation. PLoS
ONE 2009; 4:7665.
74. Gates KP, Mentzer L, Karlstrom RO, Sirotkin HI.
The transcriptional repressor REST/NRSF modulates
hedgehog signaling. Dev Biol 2010; 340:293-305.
75. Jorgensen HF, Fisher AG. Can controversies be put to
REST? Nature 2010; 467:3-4.
76. Jorgensen HF, Chen ZF, Merkenschlager M, Fisher AG.
Is REST required for ESC pluripotency? Nature 2009;
457:4-5.
77. Buckley NJ, Johnson R, Sun YM, Stanton LW. Is REST
a regulator of pluripotency? Nature 2009; 457:5-6.
78. Martinez NJ, Gregory RI. MicroRNA gene regulatory
pathways in the establishment and maintenance of ESC
identity. Cell Stem Cell 2010; 7:31-5.

Cell Cycle

79. Dinger ME, Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce
SJ, Gardiner BB, et al. Long noncoding RNAs in
mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency and differentiation. Genome Res 2008; 18:1433-45.
80. Sheik Mohamed J, Gaughwin PM, Lim B, Robson P,
Lipovich L. Conserved long noncoding RNAs transcriptionally regulated by Oct4 and Nanog modulate
pluripotency in mouse embryonic stem cells. RNA
2010; 16:324-37.
81. Sun YM, Greenway DJ, Johnson R, Street M, Belyaev
ND, Deuchars J, et al. Distinct profiles of REST
interactions with its target genes at different stages of
neuronal development. Mol Biol Cell 2005; 16:5630-8.
82. Sun YM, Cooper M, Finch S, Lin HH, Chen ZF,
Williams BP, et al. Rest-mediated regulation of extracellular matrix is crucial for neural development. PLoS
ONE 2008; 3:3656.
83. Muller FJ, Laurent LC, Kostka D, Ulitsky I, Williams
R, Lu C, et al. Regulatory networks define phenotypic
classes of human stem cell lines. Nature 2008; 455:401-5.
84. Boyer LA, Lee TI, Cole MF, Johnstone SE, Levine
SS, Zucker JP, et al. Core transcriptional regulatory
circuitry in human embryonic stem cells. Cell 2005;
122:947-56.
85. Buckley NJ, Johnson R, Zuccato C, Bithell A, Cattaneo
E. The role of REST in transcriptional and epigenetic
dysregulation in Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol Dis
2010; 39:28-39.
86. Molero AE, Gokhan S, Gonzalez S, Feig JL, Alexandre
LC, Mehler MF. Impairment of developmental stem
cell-mediated striatal neurogenesis and pluripotency
genes in a knock-in model of Huntington’s disease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106:21900-5.
87. Yokoyama A, Takezawa S, Schule R, Kitagawa H, Kato
S. Transrepressive function of TLX requires the histone
demethylase LSD1. Mol Cell Biol 2008; 28:3995-4003.
88. Qu Q, Sun G, Li W, Yang S, Ye P, Zhao C, et al.
Orphan nuclear receptor TLX activates Wnt/betacatenin signalling to stimulate neural stem cell proliferation and self-renewal. Nat Cell Biol 2010; 12:31-40.
89. Zhao C, Sun G, Li S, Shi Y. A feedback regulatory
loop involving microRNA-9 and nuclear receptor TLX
in neural stem cell fate determination. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2009; 16:365-71.
90. Wang Y, Guan Y, Wang F, Huang A, Wang S, Zhang
YA. Bmi-1 regulates self-renewal, proliferation and
senescence of human fetal neural stem cells in vitro.
Neurosci Lett 2010; 476:74-8.
91. Pereira JD, Sansom SN, Smith J, Dobenecker MW,
Tarakhovsky A, Livesey FJ. Ezh2, the histone methyltransferase of PRC2, regulates the balance between
self-renewal and differentiation in the cerebral cortex.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010; 107:15957-62.
92. Ku M, Koche RP, Rheinbay E, Mendenhall EM, Endoh
M, Mikkelsen TS, et al. Genomewide analysis of PRC1
and PRC2 occupancy identifies two classes of bivalent
domains. PLoS Genet 2008; 4:1000242.
93. Tahiliani M, Mei P, Fang R, Leonor T, Rutenberg
M, Shimizu F, et al. The histone H3K4 demethylase
SMCX links REST target genes to X-linked mental
retardation. Nature 2007; 447:601-5.
94. Hobert O, Carrera I, Stefanakis N. The molecular and
gene regulatory signature of a neuron. Trends Neurosci
2010; 33:435-45.
95. Chen L, Li Z, Zwolinska AK, Smith MA, Cross B,
Koomen J, et al. MDM2 recruitment of lysine methyltransferases regulates p53 transcriptional output.
EMBO J 2010; 29:2538-52.
96. Schaefer A, Sampath SC, Intrator A, Min A, Gertler
TS, Surmeier DJ, et al. Control of cognition and adaptive behavior by the GLP/G9a epigenetic suppressor
complex. Neuron 2009; 64:678-91.
97. Kleefstra T, van Zelst-Stams WA, Nillesen WM,
Cormier-Daire V, Houge G, Foulds N, et al. Further
clinical and molecular delineation of the 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome supports a major contribution
of EHMT1 haploinsufficiency to the core phenotype. J
Med Genet 2009; 46:598-606.

4485

98. Kleefstra T, Brunner HG, Amiel J, Oudakker AR,
Nillesen WM, Magee A, et al. Loss-of-function mutations in euchromatin histone methyl transferase 1
(EHMT1) cause the 9q34 subtelomeric deletion syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 2006; 79:370-7.
99. Northcott PA, Nakahara Y, Wu X, Feuk L, Ellison
DW, Croul S, et al. Multiple recurrent genetic events
converge on control of histone lysine methylation in
medulloblastoma. Nat Genet 2009; 41:465-72.
100. Tachibana M, Nozaki M, Takeda N, Shinkai Y.
Functional dynamics of H3K9 methylation during meiotic prophase progression. EMBO J 2007;
26:3346-59.
101. Tan YP, Li S, Jiang XJ, Loh W, Foo YK, Loh CB, et al.
Regulation of protocadherin gene expression by multiple neuron-restrictive silencer elements scattered in
the gene cluster. Nucleic Acids Res 2010; 38:4985-97.
102. Mercer TR, Qureshi IA, Gokhan S, Dinger ME, Li G,
Mattick JS, et al. Long noncoding RNAs in neuronalglial fate specification and oligodendrocyte lineage
maturation. BMC Neurosci 2010; 11:14.
103. Blackshaw S, Harpavat S, Trimarchi J, Cai L, Huang
H, Kuo WP, et al. Genomic analysis of mouse retinal
development. PLoS Biol 2004; 2:247.
104. Makeyev EV, Zhang J, Carrasco MA, Maniatis T. The
MicroRNA miR-124 promotes neuronal differentiation by triggering brain-specific alternative pre-mRNA
splicing. Mol Cell 2007; 27:435-48.

4486

105. Valadkhan S, Nilsen TW. Reprogramming of the noncoding transcriptome during brain development. J Biol
2010; 9:5.
106. Lau P, Verrier JD, Nielsen JA, Johnson KR, Notterpek
L, Hudson LD. Identification of dynamically regulated
microRNA and mRNA networks in developing oligodendrocytes. J Neurosci 2008; 28:11720-30.
107. Lunyak VV, Rosenfeld MG. Epigenetic regulation of
stem cell fate. Hum Mol Genet 2008; 17:28-36.
108. Qureshi IA, Mehler MF. Impact of nuclear organization
and dynamics on epigenetic regulation in the central
nervous system: implications for neurological disease
states. Ann NY Acad Sci 2010; 1204:20-37.
109. Lepagnol-Bestel AM, Zvara A, Maussion G, Quignon
F, Ngimbous B, Ramoz N, et al. DYRK1A interacts
with the REST/NRSF-SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling complex to deregulate gene clusters involved in the
neuronal phenotypic traits of Down syndrome. Hum
Mol Genet 2009; 18:1405-14.
110. Johnson R, Zuccato C, Belyaev ND, Guest DJ,
Cattaneo E, Buckley NJ. A microRNA-based gene dysregulation pathway in Huntington’s disease. Neurobiol
Dis 2008; 29:438-45.
111. Zuccato C, Belyaev N, Conforti P, Ooi L, Tartari M,
Papadimou E, et al. Widespread disruption of repressor element-1 silencing transcription factor/neuronrestrictive silencer factor occupancy at its target genes
in Huntington’s disease. J Neurosci 2007; 27:6972-83.

112. Saijo K, Winner B, Carson CT, Collier JG, Boyer L,
Rosenfeld MG, et al. A Nurr1/CoREST pathway in
microglia and astrocytes protects dopaminergic neurons from inflammation-induced death. Cell 2009;
137:47-59.
113. Bassuk AG, Wallace RH, Buhr A, Buller AR, Afawi Z,
Shimojo M, et al. A homozygous mutation in human
PRICKLE1 causes an autosomal-recessive progressive myoclonus epilepsy-ataxia syndrome. Am J Hum
Genet 2008; 83:572-81.
114. Formisano L, Noh KM, Miyawaki T, Mashiko T,
Bennett MV, Zukin RS. Ischemic insults promote epigenetic reprogramming of mu opioid receptor expression in hippocampal neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2007; 104:4170-5.
115. Calderone A, Jover T, Noh KM, Tanaka H, Yokota H,
Lin Y, et al. Ischemic insults derepress the gene silencer
REST in neurons destined to die. J Neurosci 2003;
23:2112-21.

Cell Cycle	Volume 9 Issue 22

