REVIEWS
Emerging roles of non-coding RNAs
in brain evolution, development,
plasticity and disease
Irfan A. Qureshi1–3,6 and Mark F. Mehler1–6

Abstract | Novel classes of small and long non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are being
characterized at a rapid pace, driven by recent paradigm shifts in our understanding
of genomic architecture, regulation and transcriptional output, as well as by innovations in
sequencing technologies and computational and systems biology. These ncRNAs can
interact with DNA, RNA and protein molecules; engage in diverse structural, functional
and regulatory activities; and have roles in nuclear organization and transcriptional,
post-transcriptional and epigenetic processes. This expanding inventory of ncRNAs
is implicated in mediating a broad spectrum of processes including brain evolution,
development, synaptic plasticity and disease pathogenesis.

Non-coding RNAs
(ncRNAs). RNA molecules
belonging to an increasing
number of different classes
that function explicitly as
RNAs, rather than as proteins,
in a wide variety of regulatory,
structural and functional
processes.

Roslyn and Leslie Goldstein
Laboratory for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, 2Institute for Brain
Disorders and Neural
Regeneration, 3Departments
of Neurology, 4Neuroscience,
5
Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences and 6Rose
F. Kennedy Center for
Research on Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities,
Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York,
New York 10461, USA.
e‑mails: irfan@jhu.edu;
mark.mehler@einstein.yu.edu
doi:10.1038/nrn3234
1

Our understanding of the architecture, activity and
regulation of the eukaryotic genome has been revolutionized by the recent advent of advanced sequencing
technologies and findings from large-scale consortia
focused on characterizing functional genomic elements, such as ENCODE1 and FANTOM2,3. We now
recognize the extraordinary complexity and flexibility of the genome. It encodes not only protein-coding
genes with multiple transcription start sites, alternative promoter and enhancer elements, splicing initiation and donor sites, as well as variable 3ʹ-untranslated
regions (UTRs), but also unexpectedly large numbers
of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which have myriad
regulatory and other functions and similarly serve as
substrates for transcriptional and post-transcriptional
diversification (BOX 1). Moreover, high-resolution transcriptomic studies have revealed, surprisingly, that the
vast majority of the genome is transcribed in both sense
and antisense orientations and expressed in a highly
cell type-, subcellular compartment-, developmental
stage- and environmental stimulus-specific manner.
Each nucleotide can participate in context-dependent
transcription that is mediated by specific RNA polymerases that are responsible for giving rise to multiple
interlaced and overlapping transcripts4. These distinct
RNAs can be coordinately or independently regulated,
and they can act autonomously or be functionally interrelated, with one RNA modulating the expression and
activity of other transcripts derived from the same

genomic locus. It is also clear that the strict dichotomy
between protein-coding and non-coding transcripts is
false. Some ncRNAs contain open reading frames and
can be translated and, in addition to encoding proteins, bifunctional RNA transcripts (such as the steroid
receptor RNA activator and tumour protein 53 (TP53)
mRNA) participate in meaningful cellular regulatory
and functional processes, rather than serving simply
as passé intermediates for translation5–7.
This renaissance in RNA biology is of prime importance for the CNS because neural cells are highly transcriptionally active, exhibiting robust expression of
ncRNAs8,9, and also because ncRNAs have played a
part in the evolution of human brain form and function. Indeed, the fastest evolving regions of the primate
genome are non-coding sequences that can give rise to
ncRNAs that are primarily implicated in modulating
neural development genes10. In addition, because of their
potential roles in regulating individual genes, as well as
large gene networks (see below), ncRNAs confer neural cells with the capacity to exert very precise control
over the spatiotemporal deployment of genes, which is
crucial for executing complex neurobiological processes.
For example, microRNAs (miRNAs), such as miR‑124
and miR‑9/9*, are highly integrated into the cAMP
responsive element-binding protein (CREB), repressor
element 1 (RE1)-silencing transcription factor (REST)
and REST corepressor 1 (CoREST) transcriptional networks that mediate neural cell fate decisions11,12.

528 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
Box 1 | Life cycle of non-coding RNAs
Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are subject to diverse transcriptional and epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms, biogenesis and maturational pathways, post-transcriptional
processing, conformational changes and intra- and inter-cellular trafficking, imbuing
the non-coding transcriptome with extraordinary functional diversity and
environmental responsiveness. ncRNA expression is controlled by transcriptional and
epigenetic factors, including those that coordinately regulate protein-coding genes
(repressor element 1‑silencing transcription factor (REST), cAMP response
element-binding (CREB), tumour protein 53 (TP53) and zinc finger protein 143
(ZNF143))11,20,138,139. Specific RNA polymerase enzymes transcribe ncRNAs4. Various
classes of ncRNAs can also target each other for post-transcriptional regulation31,140.
Furthermore, a range of post-transcriptional processes (such as alternative splicing,
polyadenylation, 5ʹ capping, non-templated modifications and RNA editing) can modify
ncRNAs2,24,141. The roles of these modifications are mostly uncharacterized.
Nevertheless, they are likely to have important functional consequences, particularly in
the nervous system. For example, adenosine-to‑inosine RNA editing targets ncRNA
transcripts, including microRNAs (miRNAs), leading to alterations in miRNA–target
mRNA interactions, and targets ncRNAs derived from retrotransposons (Alu and LINE‑1
(L1) sequences), which are the principal substrates for primate RNA editing141.
Intriguingly, these sequences have undergone substantial evolutionary expansion in
primates; the highest levels of RNA editing are present in human brain142, suggesting
that RNA editing of retrotransposons mediated human brain evolution, has seminal
roles in brain functioning and might even promote encoding of salient environmental
information back into the neuronal genome. Moreover, ncRNAs can undergo nuclear–
cytoplasmic, nuclear–mitochondrial and axodendritic trafficking via ribonucleoprotein
complexes, which promote the coordinated spatial and temporal distribution and
functioning of particular combinations of ncRNAs, mRNAs and RNA-binding proteins143.
Additionally, ncRNAs can be involved in intercellular communication through transport
to adjacent nerve cells, more distant somatic sites and the germline via exosomes
released by multiple cell types and via other transport processes133,134. These
observations imply that understanding ncRNAs and their roles in the nervous system
will require interrogating, in greater detail, the life cycles of these molecules and the
mechanisms responsible for coordinating these dynamic processes.

Open reading frames
DNA sequences that are
present between start, or
initiation, codons and stop, or
termination, codons. It is
implied that these sequences
are translated into proteins.

Chromatin
The structure of the genome in
the nucleus formed by DNA,
histones, non-histone proteins
and associated factors that can
undergo dynamic changes
locally and more globally into
open and closed
conformations, which promote
the execution of specific
cellular programmes, such as
transcription and DNA
replication and repair.

The evolving non-coding RNA landscape
tRNAs and ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are examples of
well-known classes of ncRNAs. However, modern studies have demonstrated that these represent only the
‘tip of the iceberg’. The existence of many additional
classes of ncRNAs has more recently been recognized
(FIGS 1,2; TABLE 1). Most laboratory techniques for isolating RNA are based on size fractionation, which has led to
the designation of recently identified classes of ncRNAs
as long or small. There are also alternative approaches
that can distinguish biologically relevant ncRNAs, such
as capturing molecules associated with RNA-binding
proteins (RBPs)13. Algorithms using sequence conservation, epigenetic marks, structural and other features
can also predict ncRNAs14,15. Thus, it is likely that many
novel classes remain to be discovered, including those
expressed at low levels and in a highly context-specific
manner 16. The following sections discuss the major
classes of ncRNAs, including the most recently identified,
abundant and versatile class, long ncRNAs (lncRNAs).
Long non-coding RNAs. lncRNAs are transcripts of at
least 200 nucleotides in length, although they can be
orders of magnitude longer. lncRNAs are transcribed
from intergenic regions (large intergenic ncRNAs (lincRNAs))17,18; in antisense, overlapping, intronic and bidirectional orientations relative to protein-coding genes;
from gene regulatory regions (UTRs19, promoters20 and

enhancers21); and from specific chromosomal regions
(telomeres22) (FIG. 1a). Intriguingly, lncRNAs are also
derived from the mitochondrial genome23 (FIG. 1b).
lncRNAs are subject to post-transcriptional processing, potentially undergoing 5ʹ capping, polyadenylation,
alternative splicing, RNA editing and trafficking2,24. Many
lncRNAs exert regulatory effects on the genomic loci they
are derived from or on neighbouring loci. For example,
lincRNAs can have enhancer-like activity 21. By contrast,
other lncRNAs, such as HOX transcript antisense RNA
(HOTAIR)25 and X (inactive)-specific transcript (XIST)26,
promote the establishment of repressive chromatin environments across large genomic regions and even entire
chromosomes, respectively. Indeed, lncRNAs have a
broad range of functions, including roles in transcriptional and epigenetic mechanisms via the recruitment of
transcription factors and chromatin-modifying complexes to specific nuclear and genomic sites; alternative
splicing and other post-transcriptional RNA modifications through the assembly of nuclear domains containing
RNA-processing factors; nuclear–cytoplasmic shuttling;
and translational control27. lncRNAs can also act as precursors for small ncRNAs, such as small nucleolar RNAs
(snoRNAs) and miRNAs.
An elegant framework for categorizing the emerging
functions of lncRNAs was recently proposed. It describes
lncRNAs as: signals for integrating temporal, spatial,
developmental and stimulus-specific cellular information; decoys with the ability to sequester a range of RNA
and protein molecules, thereby inhibiting their functions;
guides for genomic site-specific and more widespread
recruitment of transcriptional and epigenetic regulatory
factors; and scaffolds for macromolecular assemblies with
varied functions27.
Small non-coding RNAs with roles in RNAi pathways.
The most important small ncRNAs are those involved
in post-transcriptional regulation of target RNAs via
RNAi. These include miRNAs, endogenous small interfering RNAs (endo-siRNAs) and PIWI-interacting RNAs
(piRNAs) (FIG. 2a,b). Mature miRNAs are 20–23 nucleotide single-stranded RNAs (ssRNAs), canonically derived
from longer primary transcripts (pri-miRNA)28,29. primiRNAs are processed by the DROSHA (also known
as ribonuclease 3)-containing microprocessor complex,
exported into the cytoplasm by exportin 5, and cleaved
by the DICER1 ribonuclease. Mature miRNAs are loaded
onto Argonaute proteins and integrated into diverse multicomponent RNA-induced silencing complexes (RISCs).
miRNAs bind to imperfectly complementary sequences,
predominantly in 3ʹ-UTRs of target mRNAs, leading to
repression or degradation of these transcripts. Not only
can an individual miRNA regulate hundreds of different mRNAs but multiple miRNAs can also target a
single mRNA.
This model for understanding miRNA processing and mechanism of action is still evolving. In fact,
DROSHA- and DICER1‑independent biogenesis pathways have been described. miRNA precursors are subject
to post-transcriptional modification via RNA editing, which can affect their maturation and target gene

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 529
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
a

Enhancerlike RNA

Promoterassociated
RNA

Bidirectional
RNA

Enhancer
RNA

Enhancer

Intronic
RNA

3′-UTRassociated
RNA

Intergenic RNA

Telomere repeats

Promoter

lncRNA functions
• Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation
• Genomic site-speciﬁc epigenetic reprogramming
• Long-range genomic interactions
• Scaﬀolds for nuclear macromolecular assemblies
• Maintenance of stoichiometry and molecular titration

Antisense RNA

Telomere repeatcontaining RNA

b
mtDNA

Cyt b

ND6
ND5

tRNAs
sRNAs
Protein-coding genes
IncRNAs
rRNAs

Epigenetic mechanisms
Multilayered cellular processes
that modulate gene expression
and function in response to
interoceptive and
environmental stimuli during
development, adult life and
ageing, including DNA
methylation, post-translational
histone modifications,
ATP-dependent nucleosome
and higher-order chromatin
remodelling, non-coding RNA
deployment and nuclear
reorganization.

c

tRNA-derived,
stress-induced RNA

Transcription
initiation RNA
Promoterassociated RNA

Nuclear domains
A range of dynamically forming
macromolecular nuclear
assemblies found prominently
in neural cells and consisting of
chromatin and diverse factors
involved in transcriptional and
epigenetic regulation and posttranscriptional RNA
processing, such as
transcription factories, Cajal
bodies, promyelocytic
leukaemia nuclear bodies,
nuclear stress bodies, nuclear
speckles and paraspeckles.

Argonaute proteins
Proteins of the AGO and PIWI
subfamilies that interact with
microRNAs and endogenous
small interfering RNAs and with
PIWI-interacting RNAs,
respectively, and have key roles
in mediating post-transcriptional RNA silencing.

Transcription start
site-associated RNA

MicroRNAoﬀset RNA

Y RNA

Antisense terminiassociated RNA
TerminiSplice-site snoRNAassociated
RNA
derived RNA RNA

Promoter

Vault
RNA

NF90-associated
RNA

Centromere
repeatassociated
RNA

Telomere
RNA

KERV
repeats

Telomere
repeats

Figure 1 | Emerging classes of non-coding RNAs. a | Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs; shown in blue) mediate a
broad array of genomic and cellular functions and are independently transcribed from: intergenic regions; in
antisense, overlapping, intronic and bidirectional orientations to protein-coding genes
(black);
from | Neuroscience
Nature
Reviews
gene-regulatory regions, including gene promoters, enhancers and untranslated regions (UTRs); and from specific
chromosomal regions, including telomeres (arrows indicate direction of transcription). b | The mitochondrial
genome contains small ncRNAs (such as ribosomal RNA (rRNA), tRNA and others) and lncRNAs transcribed from
both heavy (outer) and light (inner) strands. Cytochrome b (Cyt b) and NADH dehydrogenase 5 (ND5) and ND6 are
mitochondrial protein-coding genes that are associated with mitochondrial lncRNAs transcribed from the
complementary mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) strand. c | Small ncRNAs mediate RNAi and act as guides for RNA
modifications (see FIG. 2), and additional small ncRNAs are derived from protein-coding gene (black) regulatory
regions and gene boundaries, including 5ʹ regulatory regions (red), gene termini (orange), intron–exon junctions
(yellow) and introns (green). They are also derived from structural components of chromosomes, including
centromeres (purple) and telomeres (blue), and can be the cleavage products of other ncRNAs or originate from
other sources (white). KERV, kangaroo endogenous retrovirus; NF90, nuclear factor 90; snoRNA, small nucleolar
RNA; sRNAs, small RNAs.

530 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
a miRNA

miRNA
(canonical)

mirtron
(non-canonical)

Transcription

endo-siRNA
cistrans- Inverted
acting acting repeat

b piRNA
Transposon

Transposon

piRNA cluster

Transcription
and splicing

pri-miRNA

Transcription

Lariat

Transcription

+

Debranching
and folding

endo-siRNA precursors

piRNA precursor

Nuclear export

Nuclear export

DROSHA
Nucleus

DGCR8

Cytoplasm

Nuclear export

DICER1

pre-miRNA

DICER2

Secondary
processing

Primary
processing
Mature
miRNA

Mature
endo-siRNA

AGO1–4

Mature
piRNA

Ping• MILI
pong
• MIWI2
cycle

AGO2
piRNP complex

RNP complex
• Transcriptional repression
• Deadenylation

• Transposon modulation
• Post-transcriptional regulation

Endonucleolytic
cleavage
snoRNA

c

C/D snoRNA + H/ACA snoRNA

Nucleus

snoRNP proteins
Other snoRNAs
C/D snoRNP + H/ACA snoRNP
• Alternative splicing
• Transcription
• Translation
• Genomic imprinting
• Telomere maintenance

scaRNA
Spliceosomal RNA modiﬁcations

2′ O-methylation

Pseudouridylation
Cajal body

Nucleolus

pre-rRNA rRNA

Figure 2 | Non-coding RNAs mediating RNAi and RNA modifications. Biogenesis and functions of non-coding RNAs
mediating RNAi are shown. a | Left panel: microRNAs (miRNAs) are transcribed as primary miRNA (pri-miRNA; canonical
Nature Reviews
pathway) or from introns (mirtrons; non-canonical pathway). After pri-miRNA and mirtron processing
by the| Neuroscience
DROSHA–
DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (DGCR8) complex or lariat debranching or folding enzymes, respectively, and nuclear
export, precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) are processed by DICER1 and undergo ribonucleoprotein (RNP) assembly with
Argonaute proteins 1–4 (AGO1–4). Right panel: endogenous small interfering RNAs (endo-siRNAs) are generated from cisor trans-acting sense–antisense pairs, inverted repeats and transposons. endo-siRNAs undergo nuclear processing and
export, cytoplasmic processing by DICER2, and RNP assembly with AGO2. miRNAs promote deadenylation and
translational repression and endo-siRNAs promote endonucleotytic cleavage, respectively. b | PIWI-interacting RNAs
(piRNAs) are generated from transposons and piRNA clusters. piRNA precursors undergo nuclear processing and export,
primary or cyclic secondary processing (by the PIWI proteins MILI and MIWI2) and piRNP complex assembly. piRNAs
mediate transposon modulation and post-transcription regulation. c | Roles of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are shown.
snoRNAs are transcribed from introns, processed into C/D and H/ACA snoRNAs, undergo small nucleolar
ribonucleoprotein (snoRNP) assembly in Cajal bodies and promote methylation and pseudouridylation of pre-ribosomal
RNA (pre-rRNA) in the nucleolus. Small Cajal body-specific RNAs (scaRNAs) promote similar splicesosomal RNA
modifications and other snoRNAs display additional functions.

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 531
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
Table 1 | Examples of the diversity and functionality of emerging classes of non-coding RNAs
Class

Description

Refs

Antisense lncRNAs

lncRNAs derived from antisense transcription, present at ~70% of mammalian genomic loci and
implicated in the regulation of sense protein-coding genes

3

Antisense termini-associated
short RNAs

Small ncRNAs with 5ʹ poly‑U tails originating from 3ʹ termini of genes in antisense orientation,
suggesting transcription by RNA-dependent RNA polymerase

45

Centromere
repeat-associated small
interacting RNAs

Small ncRNAs (34–42 nucleotides) derived from centromeric repeats with putative roles in local
epigenetic modifications and heterochromatin formation

47

Endogenous small interfering
RNAs

Small DICER-dependent ncRNAs (21–26 nucleotides) associated with Argonaute proteins (AGO2) and
involved in post-transcriptional and epigenetic silencing of protein-coding genes and transposons

33

Enhancer RNAs

lncRNAs transcribed from enhancer domains of, and expressed coordinately with, activity-dependent
neuronal genes

109

Enhancer-like long ncRNAs

lncRNAs exhibiting enhancer activity, particularly for genes regulating development and
differentiation

21

Large intergenic RNAs

lncRNAs derived from intergenic regions that act as guides for recruiting PRC2, CoREST and other
chromatin-modifying complexes

lncRNAs

Large family of ncRNAs (>200 nucleotides) with diverse functional roles

24

MicroRNA-offset RNAs

Small ncRNAs (~20 nucleotides) produced from microRNA precursors and exhibiting independent
expression relative to associated microRNAs, implying distinct functional roles

46

MicroRNAs

Small DICER-dependent ncRNAs (20–23 nucleotides) associated with Argonaute proteins (AGO1–4)
and involved in post-transcriptional silencing of protein-coding genes and ncRNAs

28,29

Mitochondrial ncRNAs

Small ncRNAs and lncRNAs generated from both strands of the mitochondrial genome, regulated by
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins and expressed in cell type- and tissue-specific patterns

23,51

PIWI-interacting RNAs

Small ncRNAs (26–30 nucleotides) associated with the PIWI subclass of Argonaute proteins and
involved in silencing of mRNAs and transposons

Promoter-associated long
RNAs

lncRNAs transcribed from promoter domains of protein-coding genes, particularly cell cycle
modulators, and capable of recruiting regulatory factors

Promoter-associated small
RNAs

Small ncRNAs (20–200 nucleotides) possessing 5ʹ ends that coincide with the transcription start sites
of protein-coding genes and ncRNAs

43

Small nucleolar RNAs

Small ncRNAs derived from intronic regions with roles in promoting RNA modifications, including
pseudouridylation (H/ACA snoRNAs) and methylation (C/D snoRNAs), as well as pre-mRNA processing

36

Small RNAs derived from
small nucleolar RNAs

Small ncRNAs derived from 3ʹ ends of H/ACA snoRNAs (20–24 nucleotides) and 5ʹ ends of C/D
snoRNAs (17–19 nucleotides and >27 nucleotides) with microRNA-like functions

41

Small nuclear factor
90‑associated RNAs

Small ncRNAs (117 nucleotides) associated with the nuclear factor 90 RBP and exhibiting accelerated
evolution and expansion in hominids and region-specific expression in human brain

151

Splice-site RNAs

Small ncRNAs (17–18 nucleotides) derived from splice sites of highly transcribed genes, and expressed
in developmental stage- and region-specific patterns

46

Telomere small RNAs

Small DICER-independent telomere-specific ncRNAs (~24 nucleotides)

48

Telomere repeat-containing
RNAs

lncRNAs transcribed from telomeric repeats and dynamically regulated during the cell cycle with roles
in heterochromatin formation and telomere functioning

22

Termini-associated short
RNAs

Small ncRNAs originating from 3ʹ termini of protein-coding genes and ncRNAs

24

Transcription initiation RNAs

Small ncRNAs (18 nucleotides) originating downstream of transcription start sites of protein-coding
genes, implicated in modulating CTCF localization and nucleosome density

Transcription start site
associated RNAs

Small ncRNAs (20–90 nucleotides) originating from the -250 to +50 position relative to the
transcription start site of protein-coding genes

152

tRNA-derived RNA fragments

Small ncRNAs (19–40 nucleotides) derived from cleavage of mature tRNAs constitutively by DICER
and in response to stress by angiogenin (in humans), promoting stress granule assembly and inhibiting
mRNA translation

49

3ʹ-untranslated
region-associated ncRNAs

lncRNAs derived from 3ʹ-untranslated regions of protein-coding transcripts and exhibiting
independent developmental stage- and tissue-specific expression profiles

19

Vault RNAs

Small ncRNAs (88–100 nucleotides) integral to the vault RNP complex with putative roles in multidrug
resistance, apoptosis resistance and innate immunity

153,154

Y RNAs

Small ncRNAs (~100 nucleotides) required for DNA replication, cleaved into microRNAs and
implicated in Ro RBP localization and function

155,156

17,18

34
20,150

44,52

CoREST, repressor element 1-silencing transcription factor corepressor 1; CTCF, CCCTC-binding factor; lncRNA, long non-coding RNA; ncRNA, non-coding
RNA; PRC2, Polycomb repressive complex 2; RBP, RNA-binding protein.

532 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
interactions30. miRNAs can also target and repress other
ncRNAs. For example, miR‑671 silences the expression
of an antisense lncRNA transcribed from the cerebellar
degeneration-related protein 1 locus31. Moreover, highresolution RNA-sequencing analyses, including those
carried out using human brain tissues, have revealed
most miRNAs have length and sequence heterogeneity32.
These miRNA variants (isomiRs) are present in developmental stage- and tissue-specific profiles and selectively
associate with particular Argonaute RBPs, implying
nuanced and context-dependent functional roles.
endo-siRNAs are 21–26 nucleotide double-stranded
RNAs (dsRNAs) that are cleaved from longer dsRNA
intermediates in a DICER2‑dependent manner and
incorporated into RISC, in which they function as
single-stranded entities33. endo-siRNAs are derived from
various genomic locations and are implicated in gene
regulation and genome defence via silencing of mRNAs
and transposon-derived ncRNAs, respectively, as well as
other emerging functions. In contrast to miRNAs, endosiRNAs act on RNA molecules containing perfectly
complementary sequences. piRNAs are 26–30 nucleotide ssRNAs that are DICER-independent and generated
via biogenesis pathways, including a series of amplification steps, termed the ‘ping-pong’ cycle34. piRNAs
derived from transposon elements are implicated in
regulating transposon activity, whereas piRNAs derived
from piRNA clusters are implicated in modulating gene
expression. Although piRNAs were initially found in
germ cells, recent studies have established that piRNAs
are expressed in somatic cells, including neurons35.
Small non-coding RNAs as guides for modifying other
RNAs. snoRNAs guide RNA-modifying enzyme complexes to other RNA molecules (such as rRNAs) in the
nucleolus36,37 (FIG. 2c). These functions are mediated by
the formation of duplexes between snoRNAs and RNAs
with complementary sequences. The H/ACA and C/D
box snoRNAs promote pseudouridinylation and methylation, respectively. Additionally, snoRNAs have other
functions. For example, snoRNAs from the brain-specific
snoRNA C/D box 115 cluster promote alternative splicing
through interactions with non-canonical protein partners38,39. Small Cajal body RNAs are variants of snoRNAs
that mediate alternative splicing in nuclear Cajal bodies40.
Interestingly, the majority of snoRNA loci can also give
rise to miRNA-like small RNAs, suggesting the existence
of complex crosstalk between snoRNA-mediated RNA
processing and RNAi pathways41,42.
Additional classes of small non-coding RNAs. Additional
classes of poorly characterized small ncRNAs (FIG. 1b,c)
include those derived from gene-regulatory regions and
gene boundaries (subclasses of promoter-associated small
RNAs43, such as transcription initiation RNAs (tiRNAs)44,
termini-associated short RNAs, antisense terminiassociated short RNAs45 and splice-site RNA (spliRNA)46);
structural components of chromosomes (centromereassociated RNAs and telomere small RNAs47,48); cleavage
of other ncRNAs (tRNA fragments49); and other sources
(mitochondrial ncRNAs50,51 and miRNA-offset RNAs46).

Functional studies have begun to interrogate these factors. For example, deleting tiRNAs that are associated
with binding sites for RNA polymerase II and CCCTCbinding factor (CTCF; also known as transcriptional
repressor CTCF) alters CTCF binding and nucleosome
density at genomic loci proximal to sites of tiRNA biogenesis52. In addition, the biological processes associated
with ncRNAs may be inferred by studying their genomic
contexts. For example, spliRNAs, which are associated
with splice sites of alternatively spliced genes, may have
a role in modulating developmental stage- and tissuespecific alternative splicing. Ongoing studies are focused
on understanding the evolution, biogenesis and functions
of these diverse classes of ncRNAs and their roles in the
CNS and other organ systems.

Evolutionary aspects of brain organization
Increasingly large proportions of non-coding sequences
constitute the genomes of organisms with correspondingly greater degrees of developmental complexity 53.
It has further been suggested that an expansion in the
inventory of ncRNAs — particularly miRNAs, which
have been continuously acquired throughout vertebrate
evolution and remain fixed within most lineages — was
responsible for the emergence of vertebrate complexity 54.
Comparative genomic and transcriptomic analyses
suggest that ncRNAs are partly responsible for evolutionary innovations in brain and the cognitive and behavioural repertoires of higher organisms. For example,
non-coding sequences associated with human neural
genes exhibit prominent signatures of positive selection and accelerated evolution10. The highly accelerated region 1A (HAR1A) lncRNA is derived from one
of 563 genomic regions designated human accelerated
regions, because they evolved rapidly since divergence
from the great apes. HAR1A expression correlates with
that of reelin, suggesting that it similarly coordinates
the establishment of regional forebrain organization. By
contrast, evolutionarily constrained genomic elements
also give rise to ncRNAs. For example, Evf2 (also known
as DLX6 antisense RNA 1) is an lncRNA transcribed
from an ultra-conserved enhancer that affects forebrain
development by modulating expression of the distalless homeobox 5/6 transcription factors55. Loss of function of Evf2 in mice leads to a transient decrease in the
population of GABAergic interneurons within the early
postnatal hippocampus and dentate gyrus. Although the
numbers of these interneurons later normalize, defects
in synaptic inhibition are present throughout life, highlighting the role of Evf2 in neuronal functioning. Analysis
of other highly conserved lncRNA transcripts in birds,
marsupials and eutherian mammals reveals remarkable
similarities in the spatiotemporal expression profiles of
orthologous lncRNAs and indicates ancient roles during
brain development56.
Recent studies also implicate miRNAs in mediating
neural gene expression changes during evolution. Indeed,
a range of miRNAs are conserved only in primates, exhibit
lineage-specific expansion or are human-specific and are
preferentially expressed in brain57–60. One interesting
study revealed that a substantial portion of intergenic

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 533
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
CoREST
PRC2
CoREST
REST

CoREST
REST
REST4 dsNRSE CREB
RE1
CRE

Nervous system processes
• Neural induction
• NSC maintenance and diﬀerentiation
• Neurogenesis and gliogenesis
• Neural subtype identity
• Neural plasticity and connectivity
• Adult neurogenesis
• Stress responses
• Brain ageing

• Protein-coding genes
• lncRNAs
• MicroRNAs
• Other ncRNAs

CoREST

ncRNA dynamics
• Feedback regulators: REST complex and eﬀectors
• ncRNA biogenesis, processing and transport
• ncRNA target gene regulation
• Epigenetic pathway modulators
• Establishment of genomic context
• Enhancer–promoter interactions
• Dynamic nuclear reorganization

REST, CoREST
and CREB

Neurological diseases
• Neurodevelopmental
• Neurodegenerative
• Neurovirological
• Neuroonocological
• Neuromuscular
• Neuroimmunological
• Cerebrovascular
• Epilepsy

Reviews
| Neuroscience
Figure 3 | Non-coding RNA dynamics mediate diverse nervous system processes and Nature
neurological
disease
states. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) engage in a complex range of molecular and cellular functions (shown in the pink
shaded box). They are also highly integrated, at multiple levels, into the mechanisms and circuitry that underlie
neurobiological processes in health and disease. The expression of microRNAs, long ncRNAs (lncRNAs) and possibly
other classes of ncRNAs, is similar to the expression of protein-coding genes: it is subject to developmental,
constitutive and activity-dependent regulation (yellow lightning bolt) by key modulators of neural gene transcription
(including repressor element 1 (RE1)‑silencing transcription factor (REST), REST co-repressor 1 (CoREST)) and cAMP
response element-binding (CREB)). In turn, ncRNAs influence the expression of these and other seminal neural factors
via gene silencing, forming bidirectional regulatory relationships (curved lines, figure right), and by affecting their posttranscriptional RNA processing (alternative splicing (REST4)). ncRNAs can also influence the activity and deployment of
neural factors. For example, the small modulatory ncRNA double-stranded neuron-restrictive silencer element
(dsNRSE) (red waves) associates with and regulates the REST complex and its modular cofactors (grey ovals), and
lncRNAs (red strings) promote the genome-wide deployment of chromatin-modifying complexes (including REST,
PRC2 (Polycomb repressor complex 2) and CoREST–REST) (grey arrows). CRE, cAMP response element; NSC, neural
stem cell.

transcripts conserved between human, chimpanzee
and rhesus macaque brains are alternative or extended
3ʹ‑UTRs of known genes and represent putative sites for
differential miRNA regulation59. A corresponding analysis
of the prefrontal cortex and cerebellum of adult humans,
chimpanzees and rhesus macaques identified substantial
and parallel degrees of divergence in the expression of
miRNAs57. This divergence in miRNA expression seems,
in part, to explain differences in brain mRNA and protein expression levels between species. Indeed, a recent
comparative genomic analysis that reported the existence
of 220 candidate RNA structural families, 280,000 noncoding regions from transposable elements and >1,000
primate- and human-accelerated regions61 suggests that
ncRNAs served as central effectors of brain evolution.
Moreover, miRNAs that exhibit human-specific expression profiles preferentially target genes involved in neural functions. These range from neural stem cell (NSC)
proliferation and differentiation to axon guidance and
long-term potentiation (LTP) (discussed below).

Neural development, maintenance and plasticity
ncRNAs are expressed in precise regional, cellular, subcellular and temporal patterns in developing and adult
brains, reflecting their widespread and diverse influence. Whereas most studies have focused on defining
neurobiological roles for miRNA62, recent studies have

also begun to characterize the expression and function
of lncRNAs63–65 and other classes of ncRNAs66. lncRNAs
that are found in developing and adult brains, including
those found in specific cortical laminae, have expression
profiles that correlate with factors involved in promoting brain development and organization and in transcriptional regulation of neural genes. For example, SOX2OT
(sex-determining region Y-box 2 overlapping transcript)
and SOX2DOT (sex-determining region Y-box 2 distal
overlapping transcript) are lncRNAs transcribed from
the same genomic locus as SOX2 and are implicated in
its regulation67.
Other classes of ncRNAs are also likely to have important roles in shaping brain development. For example,
one remarkable study recently identified thousands of
retrotransposon reintegration sites for LINE‑1 (L1), Alu
and composite SVA (SINE, VNTR and Alu) elements in
the human caudate and hippocampus68. These findings
are consistent with previous reports suggesting that retrotransposon activity is important for neural development
and plasticity 69–71. In addition, they also indicate that
retrotransposon-derived ncRNAs and ncRNAs that are
responsible for regulating retrotransposition events (via
endo-siRNAs and piRNAs) mediate somatic mosaicism in
neurons and act as regulatory control systems for the establishment, maintenance and plasticity of the transcriptional
architecture of the brain.

534 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
Retrotransposon
Mobile genetic element
comprising a substantial
proportion of the human
genome transcribed into RNA
intermediates and
subsequently reintegrated into
the genome, including LINE and
SINE subclasses, such as Alu
elements.

a

miRNA transcription and biogenesis
pri-miR-132-212
pri-miR-379-410

pri-miRNA

miR-124 CREB MEF2

• DROSHA
• DGCR8

pre-miRNA

DICER1

RNA editing

AGO2

FMRP
Protein-coding transcription

RNP assembly, transport and remodelling

miR-132

Somatic mosaicism

mSin3

CoREST
REST

CoREST

Translational
repression

Plasticity genes

MECP2

mRNA cleavage
and degradation

AGO2
CPEB

elF4A/B
NLGN1
SynCAM1

FMRP

AAA

PABP
MOV10

Bc1 and
BC200

NEAT2

P-bodies

The presence of distinct
genotypes in different somatic
cells and tissues of an individual
organism. Mosaicism arises
from somatic mutations that
can be generated by
endogenous factors, such as
mobile genetic elements and
exogenous factors.

mRNA storage
Nuclear
speckle
formation

Translational
activation

CAMK2B
Alternative
splicing

Enhancer

AGO2

CPEB

AAA…AAA

FMRP

CREB
CBP

eRNAs

MOV10

Plasticity
genes

CREB
Promoter

Cytoplasm

Nucleus
b

piRNA DQ541777

miR-132
Actin

ADF/coﬁlin

LIMK1
PAK

Actin cytoskeletal remodelling

RAC1
p250GAP

APT1
miR-138

Gα13

RHOA

miR-132

CAMK2G

miR-219

SYNGAP1

endo-siRNAs

RAS

miR-124

PSD

Plasticity genes?

PSD95

miR-125a

NR2

miR-125b

GluA2

miR-181a

EPHA4
miR-125b

Figure 4 | Role of non-coding RNAs in synaptic plasticity. a | Diverse non-coding RNA (ncRNA) mechanisms are involved in activity-dependent processes
underlying synaptic plasticity (shown in pink shaded boxes). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) contribute to synaptic plasticity through transcription
of primary
miRNA
Nature Reviews
| Neuroscience
(pri-miRNA) clusters; processing of pri-miRNAs (by DROSHA and DiGeorge syndrome critical region 8 (DGCR8)) and pre-miRNAs (by DICER1); RNA editing;
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) assembly, transport and remodelling; translational repression and activation; and associated mRNA storage, cleavage and degradation
in P‑bodies. miRNAs also modulate transcription of pri-miRNA clusters and protein-coding plasticity genes through regulation of activity-dependent
transcription factors (including cAMP response element-binding (CREB) and myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2)) and methyl-CpG binding proteins (including
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2)). The long ncRNAs, brain cytoplasmic RNA 1 (Bc1) and its primate analogue BC200 (red), promote translational
repression by binding to RNP components (including eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A/B (elF4A/B), fragile X mental retardation 1 protein (FMRP) and
polyadenylate binding protein (PABP)). Nuclear-enriched abundant transcript 2 (NEAT2) forms nuclear speckles, which are nuclear domains that regulate
transcription of plasticity genes ( such as, neuroligin 1 (NLGN1) and synaptic cell adhesion molecule 1 (SynCAM1)) and alternative splicing of plasticity genes
(such as calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase type II-β (CAMK2B)) . Activity-dependent enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) promote transcription of plasticity
genes through enhancer–promoter interactions. b | Within the spine head and shaft, modulation of local protein synthesis of neurotransmitter receptors,
scaffolding proteins, calcium-dependent signalling molecules and actin cytoskeletal remodelling factors by miRNAs, endogenous small interfering RNAs
(endo-siRNAs) and PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) contributes to synaptic plasticity by regulating spine morphology and synaptic transmission. ADF, actindepolymerizing factor (also known as gelosin); AGO2, Argonaute 2; APT1, acyl-protein thioesterase 1; CBP, CREB-binding protein; CoREST, REST co-repressor 1;
CPEB, cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein; EPHA4, Eph receptor A4; GluA2, AMPA-type glutamate receptor subunit 2 (also known as GluR2);
Gα13, guanine nucleotide-binding protein‑α 13; LIMK1, LIM domain kinase 1; MOV10, Moloney leukaemia virus 10 (also known as putative helicase MOV‑10);
mSin3, paired amphipathic helix family proteins; NR2, glutamate receptor, ionotropic, N‑methyl d‑aspartate 2; PAK, p21 protein (CDC42/RAC)-activated kinase;
PSD, postsynaptic density; RAC1, Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1; REST, repressor element 1‑silencing transcription factor; RHOA, RAS homologue
family member A; RISC, RNA-induced silencing complex; SYNGAP1, synaptic RAS GTPase-activating protein 1.

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 535
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
Neural stem cell maintenance and differentiation. ncRNAs
have important roles in regulating stem cell maintenance
and differentiation programmes, including neural lineage restriction, cell fate specification and terminal differentiation. Numerous studies have focused on defining
how miRNA factors are incorporated into the complex
transcriptional and epigenetic circuitry regulating neural
cell fate decisions62. A key experimental strategy involves
targeting the miRNA biogenesis factor DICER1. Dicer1knockout animals are associated with a range of neural
developmental defects, including abnormalities in brain
size and cytoarchitecture and extensive apoptosis72–76.
Complementary approaches have elucidated the seminal neurobiological roles of individual miRNAs (let‑7,
miR-9, miR-10, miR-17, miR-34, miR-124, miR-125,
miR-132, miR-324‑5p and miR-326)62. For example, in
zebrafish, miR‑9 modulates midbrain–hindbrain boundary (MHB) patterning during development, the balance
between maintenance and differentiation of neural stem
and progenitor cells, and their migration77. miR‑9 promotes the progression of neurogenesis in the MHB progenitor pool by targeting the antineurogenic genes (her5
and her9)78. In the mouse, miR‑9 has a bidirectional
negative feedback relationship with the orphan nuclear
receptor TLX, which mediates NSC self-renewal and
proliferation, thereby promoting neural differentiation79.
Moreover, introducing miR‑9 into the embryonic brain
leads NSCs to differentiate prematurely and migrate
into the cortical plate. In addition to TLX, miR‑9 targets forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1) and promotes
differentiation of Cajal–Retzius cells in the medial pallium80. Mice with ablation of miR‑9 exhibit impairments
in the production of Cajal–Retzius cells and early born
cortical neurons, suppression of progenitor proliferation in ventricular and subventricular zones, defects in
neocortical lamination, enhancement of neural progenitor cell (NPC) proliferation in the subpallium, shifting
of the pallial–subpallial boundary and misrouting of
thalamocortical and corticofugal axons81.
The extent to which miRNAs serve as key nodes in
networks responsible for establishing cell identity is
highlighted by reports showing that the expression of
a small number of miRNAs can promote reprogramming of somatic cells into induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs)82,83 and, conversely, how other miRNAs can act as
barriers for somatic cell reprogramming 84. Two seminal
studies demonstrated that the introduction of miR‑124
together with either a particular combination of transcription factors or miR‑9/9* in human fibroblasts can
reprogramme them into neuronal cells85,86. The mechanisms of action for these two miRNAs may involve
modulating the composition of ATP-dependent Brg1/
Brm-associated factor (BAF) chromatin-remodelling
complexes, which are comprised of specific combinations of subunits and are essential for particular stages
of neuronal lineage maturation87. miR‑124 and miR‑9/9*
are also crucial for modulating neural gene expression
because they are integrated with the circuitry of CREB,
REST and CoREST, which are master transcriptional and
epigenetic regulators of neural genes and neural cell fate
decisions11,12 (FIG. 3). miRNAs also regulate glial lineage

elaboration. For example, Dicer1 depletion leads to disruptions in the maturation of oligodendroglial (OL) and
astroglial lineage species, which can be rescued by reintroducing particular miRNAs73–75. Given the emerging
roles of REST and CoREST in NSC maintenance, lineage
restriction, neuronal and glial subtype specification and
differentiation88, these observations suggest the existence
of intricate regulatory relationships between these multifunctional factors and ncRNAs in promoting glial lineage
specification and maturation analogous to developmental
processes in neuronal cells.
Complementary efforts have been directed towards
characterizing the parts played by other classes of
ncRNAs in the establishment of neural cell identity.
For example, isolating small ncRNAs from hippocampal NSCs identified a small double-stranded ncRNA
derived from the RE1 (also known as NRSE) RESTbinding sequence, which is implicated in modulating
REST activity and promoting hippocampal neurogenesis89. By contrast, genomic approaches first identified
dynamic expression profiles for substantial numbers of
lncRNAs in developing neural cell types90. Subsequent
studies focused on determining the functions of a few
of these lncRNAs in neural cell fate specification and
maturation91,92. We used a custom designed microarray platform to identify hundreds of lncRNAs that are
dynamically regulated during GABAergic neurogenesis
and OL lineage elaboration93. Many of these lncRNAs
are transcribed from genomic loci associated with, and
exhibit expression patterns that correlate with, key neural
developmental genes. Another functional study analysed
chromatin-state maps and reported the presence of more
than 1,500 lincRNAs in NPC cells (and other cell types),
including those associated with hippocampal development, OL maturation and GABAergic neuronal function17. An RNA-seq analysis carried out using a human
iPSC paradigm showed that more than 1,500 lncRNAs
are dynamically regulated during differentiation of iPSCs
into ‘glutamatergic neurons’ (REF. 94). A large proportion
of these lncRNAs are implicated in recruiting chromatinremodelling complexes (including REST, CoREST and
Polycomb repressive complex 2) to their genomic sites
of action18,95 (FIG. 3). These observations provide insight
into the complex interrelationships between ncRNAs and
multifunctional epigenetic and transcriptional regulatory
factor complexes coordinating neuronal and glial lineage
elaboration.
Synaptic development, maintenance and plasticity.
Numerous aspects of synaptic function are influenced
by ncRNAs. Indeed, there is a bidirectional relationship
between the two: ncRNAs mediate synaptic processes,
and synaptic activity influences ncRNA expression,
intracellular transport and function62,96,100 (FIG. 4). For
example, various miRNAs target CREB, which is vital
for LTP and memory 11. In turn, miRNAs can also
be regulated by CREB activity. Specific miRNAs are
enriched in distinct subcellular compartments and can
participate in the spatiotemporal control of protein synthesis underlying axon guidance, dendritic elaboration
and synaptic plasticity 97. Reciprocally, various miRNAs

536 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
are subject to regulation by LTP and long-term depression98,99. Examining individual miRNAs reveals diverse
roles in modulating dendritic growth and arborization
(miR‑124, miR-125b, miR-132, miR-134, miR-137 and
miR-485), synapse formation (let‑7, miR‑125b, miR-132,
miR-137, miR-138 and miR-485) and synaptic function
and plasticity (miR‑1, miR-132, miR-134, miR-181a,
miR-219, miR-284 and miR-485)62,96,100. Manipulating
miRNA biogenesis and maturation pathways similarly highlights the importance of miRNAs in synaptic
structure and physiology. For example, in Drosophila
melanogaster, hypomorphic mutations of miRNA pathway components drosha, dgcr8 (DiGeorge syndrome
critical region 8; also known as pasha) and Dicer1 lead
to reduced levels of miRNAs and defects in synaptic
transmission in photoreceptor neurons, but no neural
developmental effects101. In mice, using conditional and
inducible strategies to inactivate Dicer1 in forebrain
neurons yields alterations in dendritic spine morphology 72,102. Mice with monoallelic deletions of Dgcr8 have
decreased levels of expression for a subset of miRNAs
involved in synaptic development and functioning 103.
Accordingly, pyramidal neurons in the cortex of these
mice exhibit impairments in dendritic morphology and
excitatory synaptic transmission. These observations suggest that other short ncRNAs, which are dependent on
these biogenesis and maturation pathways, also have roles
in establishing these abnormal synaptic phenotypes.
miRNAs and associated factors are often packaged
into cytoplasmic RNA–protein complexes (neuronal
RNA granules) that mediate subcellular targeting,
metabolism and effector functions96. Studies of RBPs —
many of which are linked to neurological diseases — have
therefore been used to elucidate how miRNAs promote
synaptic development and plasticity. The fragile X mental
retardation 1 protein (FMRP) and related family members (FXR1P (also known as FMR1) and FXR2P (also
known as FMR2)) provide salient examples. This family
of RBPs is integrated with miRNA pathways at multiple
levels and promotes the stabilization, dendritic targeting
and local synaptic translation of neuronal mRNAs104,105.
These RBPs interact with miRNA biogenesis (through
DICER1) and effector (RISC) mechanisms, directly
associate with particular miRNAs and are even subject
to regulation by miRNAs. In fact, FXR1P is involved
in the biogenesis of miR‑9 and miR‑124 (REF. 106) and,
in turn, its expression is modulated by various miRNAs107. Ataxin 2 (ATX2) is another example of a protein involved in neurological disease that links RNA
granules and miRNA pathways with synaptic functions.
ATX2 and its homologues are RBPs that interact with
a range of RNA processing factors (including polyadenylate binding protein (PABP) and maternal expression
at 31B (ME31B)) and have established roles in RNA
granule assembly and translational regulation. A recent
study further demonstrated that D. melanogaster ATX2
is required for synaptic plasticity in a long-term olfactory
habituation paradigm108. It suggested that ATX2 specifically regulates the Argonaute 1 (AGO1)–RISC pathway
of miRNA-mediated translational repression through
effects mediated by ME31B and PABP, which interact

with the core RISC proteins, GW182 (also known as
TNRC6A) and AGO1.
Other ncRNAs are also implicated in modulating
synaptic development, maintenance and plasticity. One
intriguing report identified thousands of ncRNAs in
neuronal cells derived from enhancer elements, called
enhancer RNAs (eRNAs)109. The transcription of eRNAs
is activity-dependent and correlates with the expression
of proximally located protein-coding genes, suggesting that the process of eRNA transcription and/or the
eRNA transcripts are responsible for promoting activity-dependent gene transcription. Additionally, specific
lncRNAs located in the nucleus or those that are trafficked to dendritic compartments can mediate essential
synaptic processes. For example, nuclear-enriched abundant transcript 2 (NEAT2; also known as MALAT1) is a
nuclear lncRNA that modulates synaptogenesis by regulating synaptic gene expression (of neuroligin 1 and synaptic cell adhesion molecule 1 (SynCAM1); also known
as CADM1) and alternative splicing (of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-β) via sarcoplasmic
reticulum‑splicing factors in nuclear speckle domains110.
By contrast, rodent brain cytoplasmic RNA 1 (Bc1) and
its primate analogue BC200 (also known as BCYRN1)
are actively transported to the somatodendritic domains
of neurons, where they repress local protein synthesis.
They disrupt translational initiation complex assembly
by inhibiting the catalytic activity of eukaryotic initiation factor 4A and binding to eukaryotic initiation factor
4B, thus preventing its interaction with the 18S rRNA
of the ribosome111. Moreover, mice with deletion of Tsx,
a lncRNA transcribed from the X‑inactivation locus,
exhibit changes in associative learning and memory for
conditioned fear, suggesting that Tsx modulates shortterm hippocampal memory 112. A number of atypical piRNAs113 are expressed in mouse brain in specific regional,
cellular and subcellular distributions, and suppression of
the most highly expressed hippocampal dendritic piRNA,
DQ541777, reduced dendritic spine size, suggesting a role
for this factor in activity-dependent translational regulation66. Moreover, high-throughput sequencing of short
ncRNAs from hippocampi of mice undergoing olfactory discrimination training, a hippocampal-dependent
task, found that a number of short ncRNAs increase
more than 100‑fold with training, including various
endo-siRNAs, snoRNA-derived ncRNAs and other
small RNAs114. Conspicuously, a considerable number
of these endo-siRNAs are derived from genomic loci
encompassing genes that regulate synaptic plasticity, and
the most abundant siRNAs identified in this study are
associated with a gene involved in synapse development
and plasticity, synaptic RAS GTPase-activating protein
1 (SYNGAP1), which encodes a RAS GTPase-activating
protein that is highly expressed at the postsynaptic density and implicated in modulating α‑amino‑3‑hydroxy5‑methyl-4‑isoxazolepropionic acid receptor trafficking
and excitatory synaptic transmission. The SYNGAP1
gene locus is also linked to mental retardation and
autism, highlighting the potential for ncRNAs to be
derived from disease-associated loci and to affect disease pathways.

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 537
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
Table 2 | Roles of non-coding RNAs in nervous system disorders
Paradigms for linking non-coding RNAs to disease

Refs

Genetic variation in non-coding RNA genes

116–121

Genetic variation in disease-associated protein-coding genes affects
interactions with non-coding RNAs

122–124

Epigenetic deregulation of non-coding RNA genes

125

Perturbations in factors that modulate non-coding RNA biogenesis,
maturation and function

126

Genomic context links non-coding RNA genes to disease-causing genes
and susceptibility loci

127

Differential expression of non-coding RNAs in disease-related central
and peripheral tissues

Bidirectional transcription
Transcription that occurs on
both the positive and negative
strands of DNA simultaneously,
where the direction of RNA
polymerase progression along
each strand is either is
convergent or divergent.

130–134

Neurological disease pathogenesis
It is well known that defects in ncRNAs can lead to disease115. For example, mitochondrial tRNA mutations are
the primary causes of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies116. However, our appreciation for the evolving
ncRNA landscape and the central roles ncRNAs have
in neurobiological processes has had a major impact on
the study of CNS disease mechanisms and the development of novel clinical applications. Indeed, a rapidly
expanding body of evidence suggests that miRNAs and
other classes of ncRNAs, along with associated factors,
are involved in the pathophysiology of every major class
of neurological and psychiatric disorder (TABLE 2; see
Supplementary information S1 (table)).
Genetic variation in ncRNA genes can promote CNS
disease onset. For example, eliminating the Bc1 gene in
mice leads to neuronal hyperexcitability, increased cortical gamma frequency oscillations and susceptibility to
epileptogenesis117. Expansion repeats in the ATXN8OS
lncRNA gene are partly responsible for the pathology
of spinocerebellar ataxia type 8 through a toxic RNA
gain‑of‑function mechanism that includes formation of
ribonuclear inclusions in the cerebellum and deregulation of muscleblind-like splicing regulator 1‑mediated
alternative splicing 118. Moreover, genome-wide association studies have demonstrated that the 9p21 genomic
locus is a hotspot for the risk of stroke, glioma, plexiform neurofibroma and other disorders119–121. This
locus encodes the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
CDKN2A and CDKN2B and the lncRNA ANRIL (also
known as CDKN2B‑AS1), but analysing single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and transcript levels suggests that, whereas multiple sites within the 9p21 locus
may influence disease vulnerability, variations in ANRIL
and levels of ANRIL expression correlate with disease
most significantly. These observations underscore the
concept that genetic variation at a single locus can
affect the expression and function of many distinct
protein-coding and non-coding transcripts, and studies of genetic epidemiology must be interpreted in this
context.
Correspondingly, genetic variation present in either
miRNAs or their targets can change regulatory interactions between these molecules and, thereby, affect disease processes122–124. For example, a risk of Parkinson’s

disease conferring an SNP in the fibroblast growth factor 20 (FGF20) gene disrupts the binding of miR‑433 to
the FGF20 mRNA 3ʹ‑UTR. Deregulated expression of
FGF20 is correlated with increased levels of α‑synuclein,
which can lead to Parkinson’s disease. Similarly, a
Tourette’s syndrome-linked variant within the miR‑189
binding site of the 3ʹ-UTR of SLIT and NTRK-like
(SLITRK1) leads to increased repression of SLITRK1
(REF. 124). These findings have important implications
for characterizing disease-linked non-coding DNA
regions because an individual miRNA can target multiple protein-coding transcripts and because a single
protein-coding transcript can be modulated by multiple
miRNAs. Furthermore, these observations support the
more general hypothesis that genetic variation can alter
biophysical relationships between ncRNA transcripts
and their DNA, RNA and protein partners, considerably or more subtly influencing regulatory and functional
interactions and modifying disease susceptibility.
Additionally, epigenetic deregulation of ncRNA genes
can be associated with CNS diseases115. For example, it
has been suggested that DNA methylation modulates the
expression of the tumour suppressor miRNAs miR‑124
and miR‑137 in anaplastic astrocytoma and glioblastoma125. ncRNAs are also subject to epigenetic regulation
via mechanisms other than DNA methylation, such as
histone and chromatin modification, and it is likely that
future studies will reveal that disease-linked abnormalities in ncRNA activity are associated with deregulation
of these processes. Perturbations in factors responsible
for modulating ncRNA metabolism and function can
also lead to pathology. For example, age-related macular degeneration is characterized by decreased levels of
DICER1 in the eye that result in impaired degradation
of Alu retrotransposon-derived ncRNAs, which are
directly toxic to the retinal pigmented epithelium126.
Genomic context can also link ncRNA genes to CNS
disease-causing genes and susceptibility loci. In some
cases, mechanistic relationships between overlapping or
proximally located ncRNA and protein-coding genes have
been identified. For example, SCA7/ATXN7 antisense
RNA 1 (SCAANT1) is an lncRNA transcribed antisense
to the gene mutated in spinocerebellar ataxia type 7
(ATXN7), and it functions as a repressor of ATXN7
transcription127. Convergent bidirectional transcription has
similarly been observed at a number of loci associated
with neurological diseases and is, notably, implicated in
promoting instability of expansion repeats128.
Last, ncRNAs can be differentially expressed in disease-related central and peripheral tissues associated
with a range of CNS disorders, including neurovascular, neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative, neuropsychiatric and neuroimmunological disorders and brain
tumours62,129. It is debatable to what extent these correlations represent causal relationships. Nevertheless,
target genes of deregulated ncRNAs are often involved
in cellular pathways linked to the pathophysiology of
corresponding disease states. For example, a recent
study demonstrated that in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with Parkinson’s disease,
miRNAs were differentially expressed, with higher

538 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
Box 2 | Live cellular imaging of non-coding RNAs
The development of techniques for live cellular imaging and high-resolution analysis
of single RNA molecules is crucial for better understanding the in vivo spatiotemporal
dynamics of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). Strategies for RNA imaging in live cells
include using light microscopy (wide-field, confocal or total internal reflection
microscopy) to detect fluorescence of reporter probes (molecular beacons or MS2
labels). Oligonucleotide-based molecular beacons fluoresce upon hybridization with
target RNAs. MS2 labelling exploits the high-affinity interaction between the MS2
bacteriophage coat protein and its cognate MS2 RNA-binding sequence. The
MS2 protein can be fused with a fluorescent protein and used to label RNAs
engineered with MS2-binding sequences. One interesting study investigated the
behaviour of the human telomere repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) ncRNA, using a
molecular beacon‑based approach144. It was observed that TERRA localizes to
telomeric DNA and forms a parallel G‑quadruplex structure, which has roles in
modulating telomerase activity and gene expression. Other studies have uncovered
how the X (inactive)-specific transcript (XIST) long ncRNA (lncRNA), mediates
X chromosome inactivation with MS2 labelling145 and how the nuclear paraspeckle
assembly transcript 1 (NEAT1) lncRNA establishes paraspeckle nuclear domains using
direct visualization of paraspeckle proteins and fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching146. Various studies have also reported imaging microRNAs (miRNAs)
with fluorescent proteins, luciferase reporters and molecular beacons147. One
described imaging miR‑124 during neuronal differentiation using a molecular beacon
with an miR‑124-binding sequence148. Intriguingly, this molecular beacon was linked
to a magnetic nanoparticle, enabling the imaging of miRNAs in live animals by
magnetic resonance imaging. The same authors also reported how a molecular
beacon targeting the glioma-promoting miR‑221 can be conjugated to a magnetic
nanoparticle and to an aptamer that specifically binds to nucleolin, which is
expressed on glioma cells149. This ‘theragnostic’ device can potentially be used to
target glioma cells selectively and to image and even inhibit miR‑221 activity. The
widespread adoption of these and other innovative quantitative real-time in vitro and
in vivo imaging technologies — those exploiting different probe designs
(nanoparticles, quantum dots, organic dyes and chemical tags) and advanced optical
methods — will help to characterize specific patterns and kinetics for dynamic
ncRNA transcription, processing, transport and molecular interactions in health and
disease and to develop novel diagnostics and therapeutics.

levels of miRNAs for predicted target genes that are
involved in pathways associated with the disease,
including those in the protein ubiquitylation and glycosphingolipid biosynthesis pathways130. This example
suggests that ncRNA expression profiles in peripheral
tissues might reflect CNS disease states. Evidence from
other disorders, such as stroke, has in fact demonstrated
that miRNA expression profiles present in the brain
after cerebral ischaemia correspond with those in the
blood (in animal models131 and in stroke patients132).
Moreover, ncRNAs derived from neural cells can circulate in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid in membranebound exosomes 133,134. These overall observations
suggest that ncRNAs might represent peripheral
biomarkers for CNS diseases.
However, whether safe and effective diagnostic and
treatment strategies for neurological and psychiatric diseases can be developed by targeting ncRNAs (and their
1.

Birney, E. et al. Identification and analysis of functional
elements in 1% of the human genome by the ENCODE
pilot project. Nature 447, 799–816 (2007).
This paper reported the results of the pilot phase of
the ENCODE project, which aims to define the
regulatory and functional landscape of the human
genome, and provided evidence supporting the
conclusion that the human genome is pervasively
transcribed.

2.
3.

biogenesis and effector pathways) is yet to be determined.
miRNA-profiling assays are already commercially available for cancer diagnosis and prognostication. They are
also being developed for other ncRNAs and other systemic disorders. Therapeutic approaches targeting ncRNAs are also being explored, including those focused
on designing and delivering oligonucleotide molecules
with the ability to repress or replace ncRNAs115 and on
identifying small molecules that can influence ncRNA
biogenesis and effector pathways135. Although these
strategies are promising, selective delivery into the CNS
remains the most considerable challenge, and it has not
been addressed effectively although methods using viral
delivery systems, chemical modification and conjugation strategies, aptamers, nanotechnologies and barrier
modulation are currently being investigated.

Perspectives
The CNS is defined by extraordinary degrees of cellular
diversification, synaptic and neural network connectivity and plasticity, and responsiveness to interoceptive
and environmental signals. It is now clear that these features are mediated not only by cell type-, developmental
stage- and stimulus-specific profiles of protein-coding
mRNA expression, post-transcriptional modifications,
localization and translation but also by ncRNAs that
have similarly complex life cycles and a diverse and
interrelated range of regulatory and functional roles
in transcriptional, post-transcriptional, epigenetic
and nuclear processes136,137 (FIG. 3). In fact, because the
proportion of non-coding DNA sequence present in
the genome correlates with organismal complexity 53
(in contrast to protein-coding genes), it is intriguing
to speculate that ncRNAs preferentially mediated the
accelerated and asymmetric evolution of the human
CNS and underlie the unique functional repertoire of
the brain. Further elucidating how ncRNAs operate at
molecular, cellular and more hierarchical (neural network activity and topology) levels may therefore provide
novel insights for answering seminal neurobiological
questions (BOX 2). Chief among these may be uncovering
the genetic and evolutionary bases of complex CNS diseases, which have remained elusive. Indeed, the concept
that each nucleotide — in addition to being involved
in diverse DNA–protein, DNA–RNA and DNA–DNA
interactions in local and more global chromatin environments within the nucleus — can give rise to multiple
ncRNAs with divergent functions suggests a paradigm
in which genetic variation in even a single base pair can
both subtly and more dramatically affect the execution
of myriad cellular programmes, potentially accounting for how complex CNS disease states unfold and
co‑morbidities arise.

Carninci, P. et al. The transcriptional landscape of the
mammalian genome. Science 309, 1559–1563
(2005).
Katayama, S. et al. Antisense transcription in the
mammalian transcriptome. Science 309, 1564–1566
(2005).
References 2 and 3 reported data from the
FANTOM3 project, which focused on characterizing
the mammalian transcriptome and the organization

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

4.
5.

of transcriptional and regulatory units in the
genome, and identified the diversity of
protein-coding and ncRNA transcripts that arise
from overlapping transcription on both strands.
White, R. J. Transcription by RNA polymerase III: more
complex than we thought. Nature Rev. Genet. 12,
459–463 (2011).
Candeias, M. M. The can and can’t dos of p53 RNA.
Biochimie 93, 1962–1965 (2011).

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 539
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
6.
7.

8.

9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.

23.

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

Cooper, C. et al. Steroid receptor RNA activator
bi‑faceted genetic system: heads or tails? Biochimie
93, 1973–1980 (2011).
Kageyama, Y., Kondo, T. & Hashimoto, Y. Coding
versus non-coding: translatability of short ORFs found
in putative non-coding transcripts. Biochimie 93,
1981–1986 (2011).
Kapranov, P. et al. The majority of total nuclear-encoded
non-ribosomal RNA in a human cell is ‘dark matter’
un‑annotated RNA. BMC Biol. 8, 149 (2010).
This single-molecule sequencing study determined
that, by mass, most of the non-ribosomal RNA found
in a range of human cell types is unannotated or
poorly functionally characterized ‘dark matter RNA’.
Gustincich, S. et al. The complexity of the mammalian
transcriptome. J. Physiol. 575, 321–332 (2006).
Pollard, K. S. et al. An RNA gene expressed during
cortical development evolved rapidly in humans. Nature
443, 167–172 (2006).
Wu, J. & Xie, X. Comparative sequence analysis reveals
an intricate network among REST, CREB and miRNA in
mediating neuronal gene expression. Genome Biol. 7,
R85 (2006).
Packer, A. N., Xing, Y., Harper, S. Q., Jones, L. &
Davidson, B. L. The bifunctional microRNA miR‑9/
miR‑9* regulates REST and CoREST and is
downregulated in Huntington’s disease. J. Neurosci.
28, 14341–14346 (2008).
Burroughs, A. M. et al. Deep-sequencing of human
Argonaute-associated small RNAs provides insight
into miRNA sorting and reveals Argonaute association
with RNA fragments of diverse origin. RNA Biol. 8,
158–177 (2011).
Washietl, S. Sequence and structure analysis of noncoding
RNAs. Methods Mol. Biol. 609, 285–306 (2010).
Parker, B. J. et al. New families of human regulatory
RNA structures identified by comparative analysis of
vertebrate genomes. Genome Res. 21, 1929–1943
(2011).
Mercer, T. R. et al. Targeted RNA sequencing reveals
the deep complexity of the human transcriptome.
Nature Biotech. 30, 99–104 (2011).
This study used a targeted RNA capture and
sequencing strategy, termed ‘RNA CaptureSeq’,
to analyse the human transcriptome at extremely
high resolution and revealed the presence of
extraordinarily complex and previously unannotated
profiles of ncRNA transcription, even from relatively
well-studied genomic loci encompassing the p53 and
HOX genes.
Guttman, M. et al. Chromatin signature reveals over a
thousand highly conserved large non-coding RNAs in
mammals. Nature 458, 223–227 (2009).
Khalil, A. M. et al. Many human large intergenic
noncoding RNAs associate with chromatin-modifying
complexes and affect gene expression. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 106, 11667–11672 (2009).
This paper showed that a significant number of
lincRNAs bind to PRC2- and CoREST-containing
chromatin modifying complexes and act as guides
for recruiting them to specific genomic loci.
Mercer, T. R. et al. Expression of distinct RNAs from
3ʹ untranslated regions. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
2393–2403 (2011).
Hung, T. et al. Extensive and coordinated transcription
of noncoding RNAs within cell-cycle promoters. Nature
Genet. 43, 621–629 (2011).
Orom, U. A. et al. Long noncoding RNAs with
enhancer-like function in human cells. Cell 143, 46–58
(2010).
Azzalin, C. M., Reichenbach, P., Khoriauli, L., Giulotto, E.
& Lingner, J. Telomeric repeat containing RNA and
RNA surveillance factors at mammalian chromosome
ends. Science 318, 798–801 (2007).
Rackham, O. et al. Long noncoding RNAs are
generated from the mitochondrial genome and
regulated by nuclear-encoded proteins. RNA 17,
2085–2093 (2011).
Kapranov, P. et al. RNA maps reveal new RNA classes
and a possible function for pervasive transcription.
Science 316, 1484–1488 (2007).
Rinn, J. L. et al. Functional demarcation of active
and silent chromatin domains in human HOX loci by
noncoding RNAs. Cell 129, 1311–1323 (2007).
Wutz, A. Gene silencing in X‑chromosome inactivation:
advances in understanding facultative heterochromatin
formation. Nature Rev. Genet. 12, 542–553 (2011).
Wang, K. C. & Chang, H. Y. Molecular mechanisms of
long noncoding RNAs. Mol. Cell 43, 904–914 (2011).
Lagos-Quintana, M., Rauhut, R., Lendeckel, W. &
Tuschl, T. Identification of novel genes coding for small
expressed RNAs. Science 294, 853–858 (2001).

29. Hutvagner, G. & Zamore, P. D. A microRNA in a
multiple-turnover RNAi enzyme complex. Science 297,
2056–2060 (2002).
30. Peng, Z. et al. Comprehensive analysis of RNA-Seq
data reveals extensive RNA editing in a human
transcriptome. Nature Biotech. 30, 253–260 (2012).
31. Hansen, T. B. et al. miRNA-dependent gene silencing
involving Ago2‑mediated cleavage of a circular
antisense RNA. EMBO J. 30, 4414–4422 (2011).
32. Marti, E. et al. A myriad of miRNA variants in control
and Huntington’s disease brain regions detected by
massively parallel sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 38,
7219–7235 (2010).
This paper showed that, in the human brain, a
significant number of miRNAs exhibit sequence and
length variability. These ‘isomiRs’ are highly
deregulated in cortical and striatal tissues from
patients with Huntington’s disease.
33. Okamura, K. et al. The Drosophila hairpin RNA
pathway generates endogenous short interfering RNAs.
Nature 453, 803–806 (2008).
34. Kim, V. N. Small RNAs just got bigger: Piwi-interacting
RNAs (piRNAs) in mammalian testes. Genes Dev. 20,
1993–1997 (2006).
35. Yan, Z. et al. Widespread expression of piRNA-like
molecules in somatic tissues. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
6596–6607 (2011).
This study provides evidence supporting the
expression of piRNAs in the brain.
36. Kiss, T. Small nucleolar RNA-guided posttranscriptional modification of cellular RNAs. EMBO J.
20, 3617–3622 (2001).
37. Kiss, T. Small nucleolar RNAs: an abundant group of
noncoding RNAs with diverse cellular functions. Cell
109, 145–148 (2002).
38. Soeno, Y. et al. Identification of novel ribonucleoprotein complexes from the brain-specific snoRNA
MBII‑52. RNA 16, 1293–1300 (2010).
39. Kishore, S. & Stamm, S. The snoRNA HBII‑52 regulates
alternative splicing of the serotonin receptor 2C.
Science 311, 230–232 (2006).
40. Richard, P. et al. A common sequence motif determines
the Cajal body-specific localization of box H/ACA
scaRNAs. EMBO J. 22, 4283–4293 (2003).
41. Taft, R. J. et al. Small RNAs derived from snoRNAs.
RNA 15, 1233–1240 (2009).
42. Ender, C. et al. A human snoRNA with microRNA-like
functions. Mol. Cell 32, 519–528 (2008).
43. Taft, R. J., Kaplan, C. D., Simons, C. & Mattick, J. S.
Evolution, biogenesis and function of promoterassociated RNAs. Cell Cycle 8, 2332–2338 (2009).
44. Taft, R. J. et al. Tiny RNAs associated with transcription
start sites in animals. Nature Genet. 41, 572–578
(2009).
45. Kapranov, P. et al. New class of gene-termini-associated
human RNAs suggests a novel RNA copying
mechanism. Nature 466, 642–646 (2010).
46. Taft, R. J. et al. Nuclear-localized tiny RNAs are
associated with transcription initiation and splice
sites in metazoans. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol. 17,
1030–1034 (2010).
47. Carone, D. M. et al. A new class of retroviral and satellite
encoded small RNAs emanates from mammalian
centromeres. Chromosoma 118, 113–125 (2009).
48. Cao, F. et al. Dicer independent small RNAs associate
with telomeric heterochromatin. RNA 15, 1274–1281
(2009).
49. Sobala, A. & Hutvagner, G. Transfer RNA-derived
fragments: origins, processing, and functions. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 2, 853–862 (2011).
50. Landerer, E. et al. Nuclear localization of the
mitochondrial ncRNAs in normal and cancer cells. Cell
Oncol. (Dordr.) 34, 297–305 (2011).
51. Lung, B. et al. Identification of small non-coding RNAs
from mitochondria and chloroplasts. Nucleic Acids Res.
34, 3842–3852 (2006).
52. Taft, R. J., Hawkins, P. G., Mattick, J. S. & Morris, K. V.
The relationship between transcription initiation RNAs
and CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) localization.
Epigenetics Chromatin 4, 13 (2011).
53. Taft, R. J., Pheasant, M. & Mattick, J. S. The
relationship between non-protein-coding DNA and
eukaryotic complexity. Bioessays 29, 288–299
(2007).
54. Heimberg, A. M., Sempere, L. F., Moy, V. N., Donoghue,
P. C. & Peterson, K. J. MicroRNAs and the advent of
vertebrate morphological complexity. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 105, 2946–2950 (2008).
55. Bond, A. M. et al. Balanced gene regulation by an
embryonic brain ncRNA is critical for adult
hippocampal GABA circuitry. Nature Neurosci. 12,
1020–1027 (2009).

540 | AUGUST 2012 | VOLUME 13

56. Chodroff, R. A. et al. Long noncoding RNA genes:
conservation of sequence and brain expression among
diverse amniotes. Genome Biol. 11, R72 (2010).
57. Hu, H. Y. et al. MicroRNA expression and regulation in
human, chimpanzee, and macaque brains. PLoS Genet.
7, e1002327 (2011).
58. Somel, M. et al. MicroRNA, mRNA, and protein
expression link development and aging in human and
macaque brain. Genome Res. 20, 1207–1218 (2010).
59. Xu, A. G. et al. Intergenic and repeat transcription in
human, chimpanzee and macaque brains measured by
RNA-Seq. PLoS Comput. Biol. 6, e1000843 (2010).
60. Somel, M. et al. MicroRNA-driven developmental
remodeling in the brain distinguishes humans from
other primates. PLoS Biol. 9, e1001214 (2011).
61. Lindblad-Toh, K. et al. A high-resolution map of human
evolutionary constraint using 29 mammals. Nature
478, 476–482 (2011).
62. Fiore, R., Khudayberdiev, S., Saba, R. & Schratt, G.
MicroRNA function in the nervous system. Prog. Mol.
Biol. Transl. Sci. 102, 47–100 (2011).
63. Ponjavic, J., Oliver, P. L., Lunter, G. & Ponting, C. P.
Genomic and transcriptional co‑localization of
protein-coding and long non-coding RNA pairs in the
developing brain. PLoS Genet. 5, e1000617 (2009).
64. Belgard, T. G. et al. A transcriptomic atlas of mouse
neocortical layers. Neuron 71, 605–616 (2011).
65. Mercer, T. R., Dinger, M. E., Sunkin, S. M., Mehler,
M. F. & Mattick, J. S. Specific expression of long
noncoding RNAs in the mouse brain. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 105, 716–721 (2008).
66. Lee, E. J. et al. Identification of piRNAs in the central
nervous system. RNA 17, 1090–1099 (2011).
67. Amaral, P. P. et al. Complex architecture and regulated
expression of the Sox2ot locus during vertebrate
development. RNA 15, 2013–2027 (2009).
68. Baillie, J. K. et al. Somatic retrotransposition alters the
genetic landscape of the human brain. Nature 479,
534–537 (2011).
This study established the presence of significant
degrees of genetic mosaicism in the human brain by
identifying thousands of genomic reintegration
sites for L1, Alu and SVA retrotransposons in the
hippocampus and caudate nucleus of three
individuals, using a ‘retrotransposon capture
sequencing’ strategy.
69. Coufal, N. G. et al. L1 retrotransposition in human neural
progenitor cells. Nature 460, 1127–1131 (2009).
70. Muotri, A. R., Zhao, C., Marchetto, M. C. & Gage, F. H.
Environmental influence on L1 retrotransposons in the
adult hippocampus. Hippocampus 19, 1002–1007
(2009).
71. Faunes, F. et al. Expression of transposable elements in
neural tissues during Xenopus development. PLoS ONE
6, e22569 (2011).
72. Davis, T. H. et al. Conditional loss of Dicer disrupts
cellular and tissue morphogenesis in the cortex and
hippocampus. J. Neurosci. 28, 4322–4330 (2008).
73. Tao, J. et al. Deletion of astroglial Dicer causes non-cellautonomous neuronal dysfunction and degeneration.
J. Neurosci. 31, 8306–8319 (2011).
74. Dugas, J. C. et al. Dicer1 and miR‑219 are required for
normal oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination.
Neuron 65, 597–611 (2010).
75. Zhao, X. et al. MicroRNA-mediated control of
oligodendrocyte differentiation. Neuron 65, 612–626
(2010).
76. Giraldez, A. J. et al. MicroRNAs regulate brain
morphogenesis in zebrafish. Science 308, 833–838
(2005).
This study was the first to establish the crucial part
played by miRNAs in brain development.
77. Delaloy, C. et al. MicroRNA‑9 coordinates proliferation
and migration of human embryonic stem cell-derived
neural progenitors. Cell Stem Cell 6, 323–335 (2010).
78. Leucht, C. et al. MicroRNA‑9 directs late organizer
activity of the midbrain–hindbrain boundary. Nature
Neurosci. 11, 641–648 (2008).
79. Zhao, C., Sun, G., Li, S. & Shi, Y. A feedback regulatory
loop involving microRNA‑9 and nuclear receptor TLX in
neural stem cell fate determination. Nature Struct. Mol.
Biol. 16, 365–371 (2009).
80. Shibata, M., Kurokawa, D., Nakao, H., Ohmura, T. &
Aizawa, S. MicroRNA‑9 modulates Cajal–Retzius cell
differentiation by suppressing Foxg1 expression in
mouse medial pallium. J. Neurosci. 28, 10415–10421
(2008).
81. Shibata, M., Nakao, H., Kiyonari, H., Abe, T. &
Aizawa, S. MicroRNA‑9 regulates neurogenesis in
mouse telencephalon by targeting multiple
transcription factors. J. Neurosci. 31, 3407–3422
(2011).

www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

REVIEWS
82. Miyoshi, N. et al. Reprogramming of mouse and human
cells to pluripotency using mature microRNAs. Cell
Stem Cell 8, 633–638 (2011).
83. Anokye-Danso, F. et al. Highly efficient miRNA-mediated
reprogramming of mouse and human somatic cells to
pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell 8, 376–388 (2011).
84. Choi, Y. J. et al. miR‑34 miRNAs provide a barrier for
somatic cell reprogramming. Nature Cell Biol. 13,
1353–1360 (2011).
85. Yoo, A. S. et al. MicroRNA-mediated conversion of human
fibroblasts to neurons. Nature 476, 228–231 (2011).
86. Ambasudhan, R. et al. Direct reprogramming of adult
human fibroblasts to functional neurons under defined
conditions. Cell Stem Cell 9, 113–118 (2011).
87. Yoo, A. S., Staahl, B. T., Chen, L. & Crabtree, G. R.
MicroRNA-mediated switching of chromatinremodelling complexes in neural development. Nature
460, 642–646 (2009).
88. Qureshi, I. A., Gokhan, S. & Mehler, M. F. REST and CoREST
are transcriptional and epigenetic regulators of seminal
neural fate decisions. Cell Cycle 9, 4477–4486 (2010).
89. Kuwabara, T., Hsieh, J., Nakashima, K., Taira, K. &
Gage, F. H. A small modulatory dsRNA specifies the fate
of adult neural stem cells. Cell 116, 779–793 (2004).
90. Blackshaw, S. et al. Genomic analysis of mouse retinal
development. PLoS Biol. 2, E247 (2004).
91. Rapicavoli, N. A., Poth, E. M. & Blackshaw, S. The long
noncoding RNA RNCR2 directs mouse retinal cell
specification. BMC Dev. Biol. 10, 49 (2010).
92. Rapicavoli, N. A., Poth, E. M., Zhu, H. & Blackshaw, S.
The long noncoding RNA Six3OS acts in trans to
regulate retinal development by modulating Six3
activity. Neural Dev. 6, 32 (2011).
93. Mercer, T. R. et al. Long noncoding RNAs in neuronalglial fate specification and oligodendrocyte lineage
maturation. BMC Neurosci. 11, 14 (2010).
94. Lin, M. et al. RNA-Seq of human neurons derived from
iPS cells reveals candidate long non-coding RNAs
involved in neurogenesis and neuropsychiatric
disorders. PLoS ONE 6, e23356 (2011).
95. Tsai, M. C. et al. Long noncoding RNA as modular
scaffold of histone modification complexes. Science
329, 689–693 (2010).
96. Konecna, A., Heraud, J. E., Schoderboeck, L.,
Raposo, A. A. & Kiebler, M. A. What are the roles of
microRNAs at the mammalian synapse? Neurosci. Lett.
466, 63–68 (2009).
97. Natera-Naranjo, O., Aschrafi, A., Gioio, A. E. &
Kaplan, B. B. Identification and quantitative analyses of
microRNAs located in the distal axons of sympathetic
neurons. RNA 16, 1516–1529 (2010).
98. Park, C. S. & Tang, S. J. Regulation of microRNA
expression by induction of bidirectional synaptic
plasticity. J. Mol. Neurosci. 38, 50–56 (2009).
99. Wibrand, K. et al. Differential regulation of mature and
precursor microRNA expression by NMDA and
metabotropic glutamate receptor activation during LTP
in the adult dentate gyrus in vivo. Eur. J. Neurosci. 31,
636–645 (2010).
100. Cohen, J. E., Lee, P. R., Chen, S., Li, W. & Fields, R. D.
MicroRNA regulation of homeostatic synaptic plasticity.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 11650–11655 (2011).
101. Smibert, P. et al. A Drosophila genetic screen yields
allelic series of core microRNA biogenesis factors and
reveals post-developmental roles for microRNAs. RNA
17, 1997–2010 (2011).
102. Konopka, W. et al. MicroRNA loss enhances learning
and memory in mice. J. Neurosci. 30, 14835–14842
(2010).
103. Schofield, C. M. et al. Monoallelic deletion of the
microRNA biogenesis gene Dgcr8 produces deficits in
the development of excitatory synaptic transmission
in the prefrontal cortex. Neural Dev. 6, 11 (2011).
104. Cheever, A. & Ceman, S. Translation regulation of
mRNAs by the fragile X family of proteins through the
microRNA pathway. RNA Biol. 6, 175–178 (2009).
105. Muddashetty, R. S. et al. Reversible inhibition of PSD‑95
mRNA translation by miR‑125a, FMRP phosphorylation,
and mGluR signaling. Mol. Cell 42, 673–688 (2011).
106. Xu, X. L. et al. FXR1P but not FMRP regulates the levels
of mammalian brain-specific microRNA‑9 and
microRNA‑124. J. Neurosci. 31, 13705–13709 (2011).
107. Cheever, A., Blackwell, E. & Ceman, S. Fragile X protein
family member FXR1P is regulated by microRNAs. RNA
16, 1530–1539 (2010).
108. McCann, C. et al. The Ataxin‑2 protein is required for
microRNA function and synapse-specific long-term
olfactory habituation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108,
E655–E662 (2011).
109. Kim, T. K. et al. Widespread transcription at neuronal
activity-regulated enhancers. Nature 465, 182–187 (2010).
This paper identified thousands of eRNAs that are

transcribed from the enhancer regions of
activity-dependent neuronal genes.
110. Bernard, D. et al. A long nuclear-retained non-coding
RNA regulates synaptogenesis by modulating gene
expression. EMBO J. 29, 3082–3093 (2010).
111. Eom, T., Berardi, V., Zhong, J., Risuleo, G. & Tiedge, H.
Dual nature of translational control by regulatory BC
RNAs. Mol. Cell. Biol. 31, 4538–4549 (2011).
112. Anguera, M. C. et al. Tsx produces a long noncoding
RNA and has general functions in the germline, stem
cells, and brain. PLoS Genet. 7, e1002248 (2011).
113. Smalheiser, N. R. The search for endogenous siRNAs in
the mammalian brain. Exp. Neurol. 235, 455–463
(2012).
114. Smalheiser, N. R., Lugli, G., Thimmapuram, J., Cook, E. H.
& Larson, J. Endogenous siRNAs and noncoding RNAderived small RNAs are expressed in adult mouse
hippocampus and are up‑regulated in olfactory
discrimination training. RNA 17, 166–181 (2011).
This study provides evidence for the expression of
endo-siRNAs in the brain and for their roles in
mediating learning and memory.
115. Esteller, M. Non-coding RNAs in human disease.
Nature Rev. Genet. 12, 861–874 (2011).
116. Yarham, J. W., Elson, J. L., Blakely, E. L., McFarland, R.
& Taylor, R. W. Mitochondrial tRNA mutations and
disease. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 1, 304–324 (2010).
117. Zhong, J. et al. BC1 regulation of metabotropic
glutamate receptor-mediated neuronal excitability.
J. Neurosci. 29, 9977–9986 (2009).
118. Daughters, R. S. et al. RNA gain‑of‑function in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 8. PLoS Genet. 5,
e1000600 (2009).
119. Pasmant, E., Sabbagh, A., Vidaud, M. & Bieche, I.
ANRIL, a long, noncoding RNA, is an unexpected major
hotspot in GWAS. FASEB J. 25, 444–448 (2011).
120. Zhang, W. et al. Variants on chromosome 9p21.3
correlated with ANRIL expression contribute to stroke
risk and recurrence in a large prospective stroke
population. Stroke 43, 14–21 (2012).
121. Cunnington, M. S., Santibanez Koref, M., Mayosi,
B. M., Burn, J. & Keavney, B. Chromosome 9p21 SNPs
associated with multiple disease phenotypes correlate
with ANRIL expression. PLoS Genet. 6, e1000899 (2010).
122. Wang, G. et al. Variation in the miRNA‑433 binding
site of FGF20 confers risk for Parkinson disease by
overexpression of α-synuclein. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82,
283–289 (2008).
123. Richardson, K., Lai, C. Q., Parnell, L. D., Lee, Y. C. &
Ordovas, J. M. A genome-wide survey for SNPs altering
microRNA seed sites identifies functional candidates in
GWAS. BMC Genomics 12, 504 (2011).
124. Abelson, J. F. et al. Sequence variants in SLITRK1 are
associated with Tourette’s syndrome. Science 310,
317–320 (2005).
125. Silber, J. et al. miR‑124 and miR‑137 inhibit
proliferation of glioblastoma multiforme cells and
induce differentiation of brain tumor stem cells. BMC
Med. 6, 14 (2008).
126. Kaneko, H. et al. DICER1 deficit induces Alu RNA
toxicity in age-related macular degeneration. Nature
471, 325–330 (2011).
127. Sopher, B. L. et al. CTCF regulates ataxin‑7 expression
through promotion of a convergently transcribed, antisense
noncoding RNA. Neuron 70, 1071–1084 (2011).
128. Nakamori, M., Pearson, C. E. & Thornton, C. A.
Bidirectional transcription stimulates expansion and
contraction of expanded (CTG)*(CAG) repeats. Hum.
Mol. Genet. 20, 580–588 (2011).
129. Qureshi, I. A., Mattick, J. S. & Mehler, M. F. Long noncoding RNAs in nervous system function and disease.
Brain Res. 1338, 20–35 (2010).
130. Martins, M. et al. Convergence of miRNA expression
profiling, α-synuclein interacton and GWAS in
Parkinson’s disease. PLoS ONE 6, e25443 (2011).
131. Jeyaseelan, K., Lim, K. Y. & Armugam, A. MicroRNA
expression in the blood and brain of rats subjected to
transient focal ischemia by middle cerebral artery
occlusion. Stroke 39, 959–966 (2008).
132. Tan, K. S. et al. Expression profile of microRNAs in
young stroke patients. PLoS ONE 4, e7689 (2009).
133. Skog, J. et al. Glioblastoma microvesicles transport
RNA and proteins that promote tumour growth and
provide diagnostic biomarkers. Nature Cell Biol. 10,
1470–1476 (2008).
This paper showed that glioblastoma cells release
exosomes containing miRNAs, including those
overexpressed in the tumour, in order to signal to local
and distal sites and promote tumour progression.
134. Balaj, L. et al. Tumour microvesicles contain
retrotransposon elements and amplified oncogene
sequences. Nature Commun. 2, 180 (2011).

NATURE REVIEWS | NEUROSCIENCE

135. Li, Y., He, C. & Jin, P. Emergence of chemical biology
approaches to the RNAi/miRNA pathway. Chem. Biol.
17, 584–589 (2010).
136. St Laurent, G. & Wahlestedt, C. Noncoding RNAs:
couplers of analog and digital information in nervous
system function? Trends Neurosci. 30, 612–621
(2007).
137. Mattick, J. S. A new paradigm for developmental
biology. J. Exp. Biol. 210, 1526–1547 (2007).
138. Anno, Y. N. et al. Genome-wide evidence for an
essential role of the human Staf/ZNF143 transcription
factor in bidirectional transcription. Nucleic Acids Res.
39, 3116–3127 (2011).
139. Huarte, M. et al. A large intergenic noncoding RNA
induced by p53 mediates global gene repression in the
p53 response. Cell 142, 409–419 (2010).
140. Faghihi, M. A. et al. Evidence for natural antisense
transcript-mediated inhibition of microRNA function.
Genome Biol. 11, R56 (2010).
141. Nishikura, K. Functions and regulation of RNA
editing by ADAR deaminases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79,
321–349 (2010).
142. Paz-Yaacov, N. et al. Adenosine-to‑inosine RNA editing
shapes transcriptome diversity in primates. Proc. Natl
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 12174–12179 (2010).
143. Mansfield, K. D. & Keene, J. D. The ribonome: a
dominant force in co‑ordinating gene expression. Biol.
Cell 101, 169–181 (2009).
144. Xu, Y., Suzuki, Y., Ito, K. & Komiyama, M. Telomeric
repeat-containing RNA structure in living cells. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 14579–14584 (2010).
145. Ng, K. et al. A system for imaging the regulatory
noncoding Xist RNA in living mouse embryonic stem
cells. Mol. Biol. Cell 22, 2634–2645 (2011).
146. Mao, Y. S., Sunwoo, H., Zhang, B. & Spector, D. L.
Direct visualization of the co‑transcriptional assembly
of a nuclear body by noncoding RNAs. Nature Cell Biol.
13, 95–101 (2011).
147. Wang, F., Niu, G., Chen, X. & Cao, F. Molecular imaging
of microRNAs. Eur. J. Nuclear Med. Mol. Imag. 38,
1572–1579 (2011).
148. Hwang do, W., Song, I. C., Lee, D. S. & Kim, S. Smart
magnetic fluorescent nanoparticle imaging probes to
monitor microRNAs. Small 6, 81–88 (2010).
149. Kim, J. K., Choi, K. J., Lee, M., Jo, M. H. & Kim, S.
Molecular imaging of a cancer-targeting theragnostics
probe using a nucleolin aptamer- and
microRNA‑221 molecular beacon-conjugated
nanoparticle. Biomaterials 33, 207–217 (2012).
150. Wang, X. et al. Induced ncRNAs allosterically modify
RNA-binding proteins in cis to inhibit transcription.
Nature 454, 126–130 (2008).
151. Parrott, A. M. et al. The evolution and expression of the
snaR family of small non-coding RNAs. Nucleic Acids
Res. 39, 1485–1500 (2011).
152. Seila, A. C. et al. Divergent transcription from active
promoters. Science 322, 1849–1851 (2008).
153. Kickhoefer, V. A. et al. Vault ribonucleoprotein particles
from rat and bullfrog contain a related small RNA that
is transcribed by RNA polymerase III. J. Biol. Chem.
268, 7868–7873 (1993).
154. Nandy, C. et al. Epstein-Barr virus-induced expression
of a novel human vault RNA. J. Mol. Biol. 388,
776–784 (2009).
155. Zhang, A. T. et al. Dynamic interaction of Y RNAs with
chromatin and initiation proteins during human DNA
replication. J. Cell Sci. 124, 2058–2069 (2011).
156. Sim, S. et al. The zipcode-binding protein ZBP1
influences the subcellular location of the Ro 60‑kDa
autoantigen and the noncoding Y3 RNA. RNA 18,
100–110 (2012).

Acknowledgements

The authors regret that space constraints have prevented the
citation of many relevant and important references. M.F.M. is
supported by grants from the US National Institutes of Health
(NS071571, HD071593 and MH66290), as well as by the
F.M. Kirby, Alpern Family, Mildred and Bernard H. Kayden and
Roslyn and Leslie Goldstein Foundations.

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

FURTHER INFORMATION
Mark F. Mehler’s homepage: http://www.einstein.yu.edu/
faculty/profile.asp?id=1583

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
See online article: S1 (table)
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF

VOLUME 13 | AUGUST 2012 | 541
© 2012 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

