OXIDATIVE STRESS AND THE PATHOGENESIS OF
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISORDERS

Ashley Reynolds, Chad Laurie, R. Lee Mosley, and Howard E. Gendelman
Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience
Center for Neurovirology and Neurodegenerative Disorders, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198, USA

I. Introduction: Free Radicals, Immunity, and the Nervous System
II. Neuropathogenesis of Neurodegeneration
III. Free Radicals and Neurodegenerative Disorders
IV. Glutathione System, Glutamate–Glutamine Cycle, and the CNS
V. Modulators of Microglial Activation
VI. Growth Factors, Antioxidants, and Anti-Inflammatory Drug Therapies
VII. Therapeutic Immunomodulation
VIII. Summary
References

Microglia-derived inflammatory neurotoxins play a principal role in the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and HIV-associated dementia;
chief among these is reactive oxygen species. The detrimental eVects of oxidative
stress in the brain and nervous system are primarily a result of the diminished
capacity of the central nervous system to prevent ongoing oxidative damage.
A spectrum of environmental cues, mitochondrial dysfunction, accumulation of
aberrant misfolded proteins, inflammation, and defects in protein clearance are
known to evolve and form as a result of disease progression. These factors likely
aVect glial function serving to accelerate the tempo of disease. Understanding the
relationships between disease progression, free radical formation, neuroinflammation, and neurotoxicity is critical to elucidating disease mechanisms and the
development of therapeutic modalities to combat disease processes. In an era
where populations continue to age, the prevalence and incidence of age-related
neurodegenerative diseases are on the rise; therefore, the need for novel therapeutic strategies that attenuate neuroinflammation and protect neurons against
oxidative stress is ever more immediate.

INTERNATIONAL REVIEW OF
NEUROBIOLOGY, VOL. 82
DOI: 10.1016/S0074-7742(07)82016-2

297

Copyright 2007, Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
0074-7742/07 $35.00

298

REYNOLDS et al.

I. Introduction: Free Radicals, Immunity, and the Nervous System

Cells within the brain, notably neurons, are highly vulnerable to the detrimental
eVects of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This occurs because of their high metabolic
rate, rich composition of fatty acids prone to peroxidation, high intracellular concentrations of transition metals capable of catalyzing the formation of reactive
hydroxyl radicals, low levels of antioxidants, and reduced capability to regenerate.
Glial cells (microglia and astrocytes) are the key support cells of the nervous system.
However, during neuroinflammatory processes, they produce free radicals early and
often, and serve as key pathogenic elements in neurodegenerative diseases [Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease (AD and PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and
HIV-1-associated dementia (HAD)]. Free radicals have the capacity to attack
proteins, polysaccharides, lipid bilayers, and DNA, causing cellular oxidative damage. Nucleic acid oxidation occurs in neurons during disease and is detected as
elevated levels of 8-hydroxyl-2-dexoyguanosine in DNA and 8-hydroxyguanosine in
RNA. Hydroxyl radical-mediated DNA damage often results in strand breaks,
DNA-protein cross-linking, and base modifications (Nunomura et al., 1999). All of
these events can lead to neuronal injury. Oxygen free radicals are also found in brain
regions aVected by neurodegenerative diseases. These include the hippocampus in
AD patients, the substantia nigra and caudate putamen in PD patients, and spinal
fluids in ALS and HAD patients. Therapeutic strategies that inhibit free radical
formation and prevent downstream formation of hydroxyl radicals can slow disease
and remain an active area of investigation.
The innate and adaptive immune responses modulate much of the free radical
formation within the central nervous system (CNS) in both health and disease
(Carlson et al., 2002). As to the former, innate immunity is defined as a nonspecific
defense response that is activated after an antigen (microbe, aberrant protein)
emerges. Although nonspecific mechanisms also include physical barriers in the
CNS, innate immunity is best characterized by the production and release of a
plethora of secretory products by antigen-exposed immunocytes that are aVected or
regulated by redox pathways. The principal immune cells in the nervous system that
react in this manner include microglia and astrocytes. Microglia are highly mobile
cells with numerous roles in protecting the nervous system (acting as scavengers and
chemical secretors, and to present antigen to induce an immune response). They also
aVect the pathobiology of neurodegenerative disorders by eliciting inflammatory
reactions as a consequence of infection or disease. Activated microglia participate in
inflammatory processes linked to neurodegeneration by producing neurotoxic factors including quinolinic acid, superoxide anions, matrix metalloproteinases, nitric
oxide (NO), arachidonic acid and its metabolites, chemokines, proinflammatory
cytokines, and excitotoxins including glutamate. Astrocytes are a major brain cell

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

299

that provide physical support to neurons as well as assisting the microglia during
cleanup of debris. Astrocytes also provide direct support to neurons by secreting
growth factors required for proper function of the nervous system and control of
fluid composition surrounding neurons. Neurons also play a role in innate immune
function, but to a significantly lesser degree than microglia or astrocytes. The cellular
machinery of microglia, astrocytes, and neurons and their production and regulation of toxic free radicals are illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2. Briefly, nervous system cells
contain the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase complex, which when assembled and activated, produces free radicals in abundance that
can lead to tissue damage (McGeer and McGeer, 2002a). Another source of these
destructive oxidants is credited to mitochondrial metabolism, and is estimated that
up to 1% of the mitochondrial electron flow leads to formation of superoxide radicals
(Lass et al., 1997). Albeit the production of free radicals and ROS facilitates the
function of the innate immune system in host defense against invading organisms,
the secondary consequence of such reactions, if not properly controlled (as occurs in
neurodegenerative diseases), is tissue injury.
Adaptive immunity refers to antigen-specific immune responses, and is significantly more complex. Antigen first must be processed and recognized by antigenpresenting cells such as dendritic cells, macrophages, and microglia. Once an
antigen has been recognized, the adaptive immune system expands large numbers
of immune cells (commonly T cells) specifically designed to attack and destroy the
foreign antigen. The role of free radicals produced and regulated by T cells in the
context of neurodegenerative diseases is incompletely understood. However, for
neurodegenerative disorders, the presence within the brain of major T cell subsets
in ratios exceeding those typically found in the periphery suggests a more profound role in disease than merely performing a surveillance function. How these
T cells are activated, whether they are antigen-specific, or migrating in response to
microglial inflammation has yet to be determined.
Oxidative abnormalities and damage are a major pathogenic feature of AD,
PD, ALS, and HAD (Andersen, 2004; Tabner et al., 2001). Importantly, compensatory mechanisms are operative and neurons have the capacity to upregulate
antioxidant defenses, which suggest a balance for oxidant damage in disease
(Carri et al., 2003). However, when pro-oxidants surpass the endogenous controls
or antioxidants, a formula for oxidative stress arises and aVects disease. Oxidative
stress has been linked to protein misfolding and aggregation, and ultimately to
microglial activation, thus ascribing a pathogenic trigger to the chronic inflammatory response and neurodegeneration. The processes involved in oxidative
stress and protein aggregation are not mutually exclusive. The exact mechanisms
by which protein aggregates formed in AD, PD, and ALS mediate neuronal
cell death remain incomplete, has been linked to ROS generation, either
directly or through microglial activation that ultimately aVects cell demise.

Activated
microglia

Resting
microglia

HIV-1
Dead neurons
a-synuclein
Amyloid-b

RNS
TNF-a

ROS
RNS
TNF-a, IL-1b,
arachidonic acid
metabolites,
ROS, RNS

Fa

-a

TNF-a

TN

F
TN 1b
IL-

b
-1

IL

s
S
RN okine ls
t
S,
a
RO s/cy
ign
ine jury s
ok
l in
em
Ch urona
Ne

ROS
RNS

TNF-a
ROS

TG
FIL
-6 b

Reactive
microglia

300

Astrocyte
activatio
n
Astrocyte

Astrogliosis
NO
1,
P-12
MC 6, IL
IL-

NGF, BDNF,
GDNF
Injured
neuron

Reactive
astrocyte

Neuron

Injured
neuron

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

301

A novel mechanism that may initiate the production of ROS is the effect of
hydrogen peroxide on protein aggregation, which in the presence of transition
metals, such as iron, transforms into hydroxyl radicals (Fig. 2) and initiates
oxidative damage before antioxidant defenses can intervene. Genetic mutations
found within AD, PD, and ALS disorders lead to irregular processing of misfolded
proteins, promoting the deposition of protein aggregates. This occurs in the
cytosol, extracellular spaces, and/or nucleus, leading to CNS amyloidosis.
In this scenario, soluble proteins are altered into insoluble, filamentous polymers
that begin to develop cross-linked -pleated sheet structures (Sipe and Cohen,
2000). -Sheets accumulate, form fibrillar amyloid deposits, and aid in the
establishment of neurodegeneration (Forman et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2005).
Amyloid- (A ), -synuclein, and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) are the primary proteins found within the protein deposits in tissues of patients with AD, PD,
and ALS, respectively. Senile plaques along with neuronal and glial inclusions are
typical of protein aggregates found in histological preparations from AD patients,
while Lewy bodies and hyaline inclusions represent protein aggregates typically
found in PD and ALS (Tabner et al., 2005). Protein aggregates may also bind and
attach to cellular components, or be phagocytosed by resident microglia and
incite ROS production leading to oxidative damage (Thomas et al., 2007; Zhang
et al., 2005). Microglial activation as a result of interactions with aggregated
proteins encompasses a common mechanism by which aggregated proteins can
facilitate ROS production and perpetuate the neurodegenerative process.

II. Neuropathogenesis of Neurodegeneration

AD is the most common neurodegenerative disease. Sporadic AD is extremely
rare in individuals younger than 60 years of age (representing less than 5% of all
reported cases), but the incidence of AD dramatically increases to 40% after the
age of 85 (Forman et al., 2004). Neuronal cell loss in the hippocampus and
amygdala, the brain subregions responsible for learning and memory, underlies

FIG. 1. Neuroinflammatory interactions between microglia, astrocytes, and neurons during neurodegenerative diseases. Microglia and astrocytes communicate through numerous cell-signaling
pathways, resulting in reactive cell phenotypes and hastening the neuroinflammatory process. Activation of resting microglia results in amplification of secretions and the production of ROS, RNS,
chemokines, and proinflammatory cytokines initiating a generalized inflammatory response and
ultimately leading to neuronal injury or death. Astrocyte activation (astrogliosis) develops from reactive
microglia that alter the astrocytic phenotype from neurotrophic to neurotoxic. (Green arrow ¼
protective response, red arrow ¼ destructive response, and black arrow ¼ spontaneous.)

HIV-1

COX-2

Dead neurons
Aggregated proteins
a-Synuclein
Amyloid-b

Amyloid-b
a-Synuclein

Apoptotic neuron

y
injur
onal
Neur nals
sig

Environmental
toxins

iNOS

NO
PGE2

NADPH
oxidase

· O2−

NO

NO
· O2− ONOO−

ATP Proapoptotic
depletion enzymes

302

ONOO−
Protein misfolding
and Aggregation

H2O2

H2O2
Fe2+

Microglia

Protein adducts
Structural damage
Ligand misrecognition
Enyme dysfunction
Lipid peroxidation
Membrane damage

Fe3+
· OH

PGE2
IL-1b
IFN-g
TNF-a

ONOO−

DNA adducts
Mistranscription
Misrepair
Mutation
Neuronal
damage

IkB
NF-k B

Neuron

NF-kB
Upregulate
proapoptotic
genes

Neuronal
death

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

303

AD pathobiology (Markesbery and Mira, 1996). Two types of lesions characterize
AD neuropathology, senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) composed
of A. A is a cleavage product of the amyloid precursor protein (APP), which
is phosphorylated tau functioning as a microtubule stabilizer. When tau is hyperphosphorylated, it enhances the formation of fibrillar aggregates that leads to
NFT. Although plaques and fibrils appear to be the most prevailing features of
AD pathology, they alone are not suYcient to generate the significant
and profound neuronal loss that is characteristic of disease. Neuronal damage
caused by neurotoxic factors initiated from inflammatory responses by immuneactivated glial cells appears to be the best link to cognitive deterioration. A
plaques prime microglia, and an inflammatory cascade is created and supported
by secondary factors including proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, or by
T cells traYcking in and out of the nervous system (reviewed in Carlson et al.,
2002). These factors can also contribute to the breakdown of the blood–brain
barrier (BBB), allowing leukocytes entry into the brain and propagating the CNS
inflammatory cascade. As a consequence of BBB breakdown and local immune
activation, the brain’s resident macrophages or microglia release a plethora of
neurotoxins such as proteases, glutamate, arachidonic acid and its metabolites,
including platelet-activating factor and ROS; of which all aVect synaptic transmission and can lead to neuronal damage. Epidemiological studies for AD have
shown that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which are known to
reduce microglia responses, also reduce the risk of AD (McGeer and McGeer,
2002b).
PD is the second most common age-related neurodegenerative disease and is
grouped among motor system disorders. PD is predominantly defined by the loss
of dopaminergic neurons (dopamine-producing neurons) of the substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNpc) and their axons projecting to the caudate-putamen or
striatum. The etiology of PD remains unknown; however, patterns of familial
inheritance and several animal models suggest a possible connection involving
abnormal protein processing and accumulation. Indeed, a pathological feature
of PD is the formation of inclusion bodies or Lewy bodies that are primarily
composed of ubiquitin and -synuclein aggregates. The majority of PD cases are
sporadic and may be due, in part, to mitochondrial defects at complex I (Dauer
and Przedborski, 2003). Complex I inhibitors, such as 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridine
and rotenone, can recapitulate pathological features of PD in humans and animal

FIG. 2. Oxidative stress and neuronal damage. ROS can arise in several distinct ways such as glial
cell activation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and protein aggregation. When ROS tips the balance
outweighing antioxidants, oxidative stress is generated and neuronal cell injury or death ensues.
Oxidative stress destroys several organic structures of the cell, including proteins, lipids, and DNA,
causing irreversible and detrimental damage. This figure was adapted from F. Gao and colleagues
(Du et al., 2001).

304

REYNOLDS et al.

models of disease (Dauer and Przedborski, 2003; Dawson and Dawson, 2003).
Reactive microglial responses, thought to play a central role in dopaminergic
neuronal death, predominate the site of dopaminergic neuronal injury, and may
be amplified through paracrine and autocrine processes (Dawson and Dawson,
2003). In PD, a clear connection exists between inflammation and neurodegeneration, even more so than aberrant protein processing and accumulation. There
is an increase in activated microglia in the SNpc and striatum of patients with
idiopathic PD (Kohutnicka et al., 1998; Kurkowska-Jastrzebska et al., 1999; Wu
et al., 2002). Indeed, attenuation of microglial activation in PD models can protect
greater than 90% of the dopaminergic neurons otherwise destined to die (Choi
et al., 2005; Du et al., 2001; Kurkowska-Jastrzebska et al., 1999; Teismann and
Ferger, 2001; Teismann et al., 2003; Vijitruth et al., 2006; Wu et al., 2002).
Furthermore, epidemiological data has shown that the use of NSAIDs decreases
the risk for the PD as it does for AD (Chen et al., 2003, 2005).
HAD is another neurodegenerative disorder that is secondary to HIV-1
infection. A common disturbance associated with HIV infection is the development of neurological disorders. Approximately 60% of HIV-1-infected patients
display some form of neurological dysfunction, most likely due to early entry of
HIV-1 into the CNS. The virus infects the brain through CD4þ T lymphocytes
(Haase, 1999) and mononuclear phagocytes (MPs: dendritic cells, monocytes, and
macrophages) (Tardieu and Boutet, 2002). The brain lacks suYcient viral control
methods and adaptive immunity; therefore, active viral replication is virtually
unrestricted and the most detrimental form of HIV-1-associated tissue damage
can occur within the CNS. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) was introduced to help
extend the amount of time a patient might have before the development of CNS
disease and its associated immune suppression takeover (d’Arminio Monforte
et al., 2000; Yong et al., 2001). Patients that responded poorly to therapy, or
those that did not receive ART, display signs of damage to their immune systems
and a more rapid progression of the disease (Ho et al., 1995; Krishnakumar, 2005;
Wei et al., 1995). Even though HAD can be observed in up to 40% of infected
individuals, ART has considerably reduced both disease incidence and its
destruction. HIV-1-associated cognitive impairment is composed of a wide spectrum of conditions from the mild HIV-1 motor cognitive-motor disorder to the
severe and debilitating HAD. The progression of HAD is extremely variable
and may depend on several issues including genetic factors of the infected
host, systemic and brain HIV burden, BBB integrity, the speed of CD4þ
T-lymphocyte decline, and the genotype of the viral strains that gain access to
the brain or induce neurovirulent activities (Anderson et al., 2002). The pathology
of HAD revolves around the formation of multinucleated giant cells of the MP
lineage, which are also the main reservoirs for the virus in the brain. MPs can
secrete neurotoxins and induce neuronal injury leading to neurocognitive

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

305

impairments and ultimately to HAD (Aquaro et al., 2000; Elbim et al., 2001; Kaul
et al., 2001; Luo et al., 2003; Xiong et al., 2000). Under normal conditions, MPs
secrete neurotrophins and eradicate foreign material to maintain CNS homeostasis (Gras et al., 2003). However, during HAD, MP-mediated control over the
neurotrophic factors becomes altered and infected MPs aberrantly aVect the
development of a metabolic encephalopathy. In addition, infected MPs secrete
proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, eicosanoids, excitatory amino acids,
TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand, viral proteins, reactive nitrogen species
(RNS) and ROS (Ensoli et al., 2000; Floyd et al., 1999; Gendelman et al., 1998;
Raber et al., 1998). The actual severity of the dementia is strongly associated with
the numbers of activated macrophages and microglia rather than the actual viral
load in the CNS (Adle-Biasette, 1999). Therefore, neuronal damage observed
during HAD is linked more to macrophage activation than to HIV-1 itself.
ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, is a devastating motorneuron
disorder. Muscle weakness is the hallmark sign of ALS, occurring in approximately 60% of patients. Unlike the previous diseases, progression of ALS is rapid.
Individuals with ALS lose function of motorneurons within 3–5 years (Weydt and
Moller, 2005) terminating with complete neuromuscular failure and death (typically caused by compromised respiratory function). ALS aVects about 5–7 in
100,000 adults throughout the world (Rowland and Shneider, 2001). The majority of ALS cases are sporadic (90–95%) (Cleveland and Rothstein, 2001), while the
remaining cases are attributable to familial etilogy (Cleveland and Rothstein,
2001; Valentine, 2002). The pathology of ALS is characterized by neuronal
degeneration and atrophy confined almost entirely to the upper and lower
motorneurons (Weydt and Moller, 2005). The hypothesized mechanisms that
lead to neurodegeneration, such as glutamate toxicity, exogenous factors, neurofilament accumulation, neuroinflammation, and oxidative stress (Bruijn et al.,
2004; Rowland and Shneider, 2001; Strong, 2003), could be independent factors
or could cooperate to cause motorneuron loss. A key discovery was the identification of missense mutations in the gene on chromosome 21 encoding for a Cu/Znbinding protein called SOD1 (Weydt et al., 2002). SOD1 is a key antioxidant in
the front line of defense against oxidative stress; it detoxifies oxidative agents by
converting superoxide to hydrogen peroxide and dioxygen, thus decreasing levels
of superoxide within its proximity. This enzyme is located predominately in the
nucleus, cytosol, and mitochondrial intermembrane space (Lyons et al., 1999).
Presently, over 100 SOD1 mutations have been identified in familial ALS patients
(Andersen, 2001; Gaudette et al., 2000; Guegan and Przedborski, 2003). The
implication of SOD1 mutations is still under intense investigation; however, it is
now hypothesized that the ALS phenotype is caused by a gain of a novel,
unknown toxic property of the SOD1 mutant enzyme rather than by diminished
SOD1 activity (Valentine, 2002).

306

REYNOLDS et al.

III. Free Radicals and Neurodegenerative Disorders

Inflammatory responses induced by reactive microglia, macrophages,
and proinflammatory T cells provide a primary source of free radicals, ROS
(O2, H2O2, -OH, HOCl, ferryl, peroxyl, and alkoxyl) and RNS [NO, peroxynitrite (ONOO), and peroxynitrous acid (ONOOH)] with the capacity to modify
proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. Copious amounts of ROS production, known
as respiratory burst, have detrimental eVects on delicate neuronal networks in the
CNS. ROS include superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl free radicals as
well as nitrogen intermediates (NO and peroxynitrite) and can cause damage to
neurons if produced in excess as occurs during prolonged neuroinflammatory
processes. Microglial-derived ROS such as superoxide cannot eYciently traverse
cellular membranes, and therefore unlikely to gain access to neurons and trigger
intraneuronal toxic events (Beckman and Crow, 1993). However, superoxide can
rapidly react with NO in the extracellular space to form peroxynitrite (Beckman
and Koppenol, 1996), which can readily cross cell membranes and damage
intracellular components. NO is produced in many tissues including neurons,
astrocytes, and microglia, and can be secreted by glial cells on activation with
proinflammatory cytokines including, but not limited to IL-1 and TNF-
(Mollace and Nistico, 1995). NO alone has a relatively low neurotoxic capacity;
however, in conjunction with superoxide, it additively contributes to neuronal
destruction. Nitrated species have been associated with the disruption of mitochondrial electron transport chain, lipid peroxidation, DNA damage, and protein
nitration (Beckman, 1996). Therefore, superoxide production by microglia, by
contributing to peroxynitrite formation, provides a significant contribution to the
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders.
The notion that oxidative stress is involved in AD stems from the free radical
hypothesis of aging, which simply states that, as one grows older, accumulation of
more ROS, coupled with diminished antioxidant capacity, results in more destruction to major cellular components (Beal, 1995; Pratico and Delanty, 2000;
Reiter, 1995). ROS in AD is caused by several factors, including active microglia,
redox-active metals, advanced glycation, and A peptide. Near neuritic plaques
and throughout the entire brain, activated microglia are heavily populated,
releasing high levels of ROS. Both the NFT and A deposits contain the redoxactive transition metal iron (Smith et al., 1997). Within aVected neurons, iron is
found in the cytoplasm and within lipofuscin granules. Additionally, alterations of
iron homeostasis occur in AD and are supported by finding of elevated serum
levels of the iron-binding protein p97 in diseased patients. This coupled with
the presence of redox-available iron in AD brain regions and activation of the
receptor for advanced glycation end products leading to oxygen radicals and
cell injury supports the importance of oxidative stress in AD pathogenesis.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

307

Free radicals that are considered to cause neuronal loss in AD are believed to be
produced as a result of the deposition of aggregated A peptide. However,
whether A functions as a producer of ROS or a modulator of redox reactions
is not clear. Accumulated evidence of surrogate markers for oxidant injury from
postmortem tissues indicates a strong association between oxidative stress and the
pathology of AD. These markers show increased lipid peroxidation, protein
oxidation, 8-OHdG levels, and a marked decline in oxidative-sensitive enzymes
(Castellani et al., 2001; Markesbery and Carney, 1999; Nunomura et al., 1999,
2000, 2001; Zhu et al., 2004).
Oxidative stress contributes to the cascade leading to dopaminergic neurodegeneration in PD (Tabner et al., 2001). Brain regions that are rich in catecholamines, such as, adrenaline, noradrenaline, and dopamine, are exceptionally
vulnerable to free radical generation. Catecholamines can spontaneously break
down to free radicals, or be metabolized to free radicals by endogenous enzymes
such as monoamine oxidases. Activated microglia also contribute to the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons by releasing neurotoxic factors such as NADPH
oxidase-derived superoxide and cytokines. Peroxynitrite production contributes
to mitochondrial dysfunction and nitration of tyrosine residues in cellular proteins
and enzymes such as -synuclein. Indeed, soluble nitrated -synuclein is able to
activate microglia to produce copious amounts of ROS through modulation of
specific ion channels (Thomas et al., 2007). Nitration of -synuclein can significantly enhance fibril formation in vitro, similar to the biophysical properties of
-synuclein isolated form PD brains (Norris et al., 2003). Aberrant protein conformations of modified -synuclein can also potentially overload the cellular
proteasome, and by doing so, may increase cellular stress associated with the
accumulation of misfolded proteins in aVected neurons (Vila and Przedborski,
2004). Hydrogen peroxide alone or with help from downstream ROS products
can also facilitate toxic events in dopaminergic neurons by either intensifying
other cytotoxic factors or by elevating the generation of neurotoxic factors in
microglia (Andersen, 2004).
Oxidative stress plays a critical role in the neuropathogenesis of HIV-1. As
stated earlier, the process of HIV infection leads to the generation of inflammatory
products, thus in turn giving rise to an excessive amount of ROS. In HAD,
production of excess-free radicals accompanied by dysregulation of antioxidants
(e.g., SOD, glutathione, and catalase) diminishes the protective potential to
establish a pro-oxidative stress environment (Mollace et al., 2001). Superoxide
anions, peroxynitrite, and NO are produced in this scenario. Peroxynitrite is a
potent oxidant that can nitrate tyrosine residues of structural proteins. Neurofilament, a structural protein that provides stability to neurons, is one of the target
proteins for peroxynitrite (Beckman, 1996). Besides aVecting CNS injury,
free radicals produced during HAD including ceramide, sphingomyelin, and
4-hydroxynonenal can also adversely aVect the disease course including the

308

REYNOLDS et al.

permeability of the BBB (Mollace et al., 2001), which may increase the tempo of
HIV-associated nervous system dysfunction and lead to progressive cognitive
deficits and death.
A primary role for oxidative stress in ALS is evident. The discovery of mutations in the SOD1 gene encoding the Cu/Zn SOD in familial ALS patients was
responsible for associating this disease to ROS metabolism (Deng et al., 1993;
Olanow, 1993; Rosen et al., 1993). Mutant forms of SOD proteins have altered
enzyme activity and can result in increased superoxide radicals such that the
formation of peroxynitrite from superoxide and NO would be favored. A decline
in the activity of SOD1 measured in patient’s tissues (Deng et al., 1993) suggests
that higher levels of superoxide activity may form and increase the potential of
developing hydroxyl radicals and eventually neuronal damage (de Belleroche et al.,
1996). Interestingly, knockout SOD1 mice show limited motor symptoms by 6
months of age (Shefner et al., 1999). These mice do not develop an ALS phenotype,
whereas mutants of the Cu/Zn SOD1 proteins are inevitably lethal. The human
mutant (G93A) SOD1 gene, introduced to a murine model, resulted in an ALS
phenotype characterized by elevated levels of lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and DNA oxidation. This human G93A SOD1 mutation confers a toxic gain
of function that destroys motorneurons (Cudkowicz et al., 1997). This toxic gain of
function was shown to come from the ability of familial ALS-mutant Cu/Zn
SOD1 proteins to catalyze oxidation reactions of hydrogen peroxide or peroxynitrite to hydroxyl radicals (Valentine, 2002). These results support the notion that
expressed mutations in the SOD1 gene lead to ALS pathogenesis by increasing the
amount of hydroxyl radicals and generating vast amounts of oxidative stress
capable of inducing motorneuron degeneration (Barzilai et al., 2002).

IV. Glutathione System, Glutamate–Glutamine Cycle, and the CNS

Production of ROS and NO in neurons is buVered primarily by the glutathione system. Glutathione is the major thiol present in brain tissue, and the most
important redox buVer in cells. This antioxidant molecule cycles between reduced
glutathione (GSH) and oxidized glutathione disulfide (GSSG), and serves as a vital
sink for control of ROS levels in cells. GSH reacts with oxygen- and nitrogen-free
radicals resulting in the reduction of peroxides (Dringen et al., 2000). Although
varying in diVerent regions of the brain, all GSH levels diminish by about 30% in
the elderly (Chen et al., 1989), suggesting a possible link with the age-associated
risk factor of AD and PD. Depletion of GSH may render cells more sensitive to
toxic eVects of oxidative stress and potentiate the toxic eVects of reactive microglia
(Dringen et al., 2000; Sian et al., 1994; Winterbourn and Metodiewa, 1994).

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

309

A common mechanism for neuronal demise may underlie most neurodegenerative diseases. The excitotoxicity metabolic pathway that modulates neuronal
injury has remained a focus of neuroscience research eVorts for the past three
decades. In excitotoxicity, glutamate release overstimulates neuronal ionotropic
glutamate receptors resulting in significant calcium influx and neuronal cell death
stroke and neurodegenerative diseases. Indeed in this pathway, the major excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter is glutamate as well as aspartate, while
-aminobutyric acid, glycine, and taurine are inhibitory. Glutamate is, without
question, the principal excitatory neurotransmitter and is the key factor implicated in aVecting neuronal death. Increased extracellular glutamate also leads to
oxidative stress and oxidative glutamate toxicity. During steady state, neuronal
glutamate acts as a neurotransmitter. Its extracellular concentration is kept to
very low levels through transporters that are present in glia and primarily in
astrocytes. Moreover, extracellular concentrations of glutamate are modulated
through the glutamate–cystine antiporter that serves to regulate excitotoxicity and
neuronal injury. Increased levels of extracellular glutamate deplete cells of cystine
by blocking the gradient-driven glutamate–cystine antiporter, a dimeric transport
system composed of a specific subunit, xCT, and a 4F2 heavy chain. Cystine is
required for the synthesis of GSH, thus excess depletion renders cells incapable
of removing ROS. Due to the involvement of increased oxidative stress in
the pathogenesis of PD, it is thought that diminished levels of GSH in the
substantia nigra precede neuronal degeneration. Indeed, when GSH levels are
diminished, the uptake of cystine is induced leading to increased glutamate eZux
and neurotoxic outcomes ( Jiang et al., 2001; Simantov, 1989) (Fig. 3).
Both in vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated that activated microglia
express the transporters and enzymes of the glutamate–glutamine cycle (reviewed
in Gras et al., 2006), suggesting that these cells may exhibit neuroprotective
properties in addition to their neurotoxic properties and can partially compensate
for the deleterious reactive state within the context of neurodegeneration. This is
underscored by the observation that, unlike astrocytes, microglia do not constitutively express glutamate transporters, but are only expressed on activation.
Therefore, the microglia constitute a local, inducible cell population that can
mediate glutamate clearance and metabolism. This property may be critical to
neuronal survival and disease outcome in CNS inflammation.

V. Modulators of Microglial Activation

Critical to understanding the role of oxidative stress and inflammation in
neurodegeneration is an understanding of the disease process in and of itself.
A common pathological feature to most neurodegenerative disorders is the

310

REYNOLDS et al.

FIG. 3. Glutamate–glutamine transporters for glutamate, cysteine, and cystine in microglia
(or astrocytes) and neurons. Communication links for redox pathways in the nervous system are
outlined. A family of excitatory amino acid transporters (EAAT) and other transporter proteins
(receptors) regulate extracellular concentrations of glutamate. When intracellular glutamate is higher
than the plasma concentration, transport of glutamate across the luminal membrane occurs. The
transporters on the ablumenal membrane surface of astrocytes or microglia provide a mechanism to
increase intracellular glutamate concentration and removal of glutamate from cells. In microglia (or
macrophages), cystine is taken up through the CD98/xCT cystine–glutamate antiporter. The cystine–
glutamate antiporter then exchanges extracellular cystine for intracellular glutamate.

activated microglial cell. However, mechanisms underlying microglia activation
to incite a neuroinflammatory cascade in disease are incompletely understood.
The pathogenic process in AD involves deposition of insoluble aggregates of
A, oxidative stress, and activation of inflammatory cytokine cascades involving
microglia. Activated microglia congregate in and around amyloid plaques, where
they can produce cytokines, ROS, and excitotoxins that can kill or injure neurons.
Oxidative stress in AD is more attributed to the free radical generation by aVected
neurons more so than activated microglia. This can occur as a result of impaired

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

311

mitochondrial oxidative metabolism (Mattson et al., 1997). Alternatively, a major
source of free radicals in the AD brain is likely to include microglia, which have
the potential to produce large amounts of ROS. Free radical generation by
activated microglia has been demonstrated on direct interaction with A peptides
and activation of the NADPH oxidase complex to produce superoxide radicals
(Bianca et al., 1999; Klegeris et al., 1997a,b; Van Muiswinkel et al., 1999).
Moreover, A can potentiate the production of free radicals by phagocytic cells
treated with other stimulatory agents such as IFN-, lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
and TNF- (Goodwin et al., 1995; McDonald et al., 1997; Meda et al., 1996).
In addition to oxygen-free radicals, large amounts of NO can be produced by
activated microglia through induction of iNOS (Goodwin et al., 1995). Activated
microglia also release the excitotoxins glutamate (Piani et al., 1992) and quinolinic
acid, and on activation by amyloid plaques also evoke fulminant excitotoxicity
activity (Giulian et al., 1995). All of which can contribute to inflammatory
mechanisms.
In PD, reactive microglia predominate within the SNpc of PD brains at
autopsy (Croisier et al., 2005; McGeer et al., 1988; Yamada et al., 1992).
A significant increase in the number of reactive microglia shown phagocytosing
dopaminergic neurons (McGeer et al., 1988) correlated with the deposition of
-synuclein (Croisier et al., 2005). In addition, microglia in the vicinity of dopaminergic neurons in disease appear to have an upregulated capacity for ROS
production due to increased expression of NADPH oxidase. How microglia are
activated in PD and aVect disease are incompletely understood, but the release of
aggregated and nitrated -synuclein from dying or damaged dopaminergic neurons in the SN is thought to contribute, in part, to their activation (Thomas et al.,
2007; Zhang et al., 2005). Several lines of evidence support this contention. First,
evidence of -synuclein linkage to familial PD is derived from the discovery
of three missense mutations (A53T, A30P, and E46K) in the gene encoding
-synuclein (Kruger et al., 1998; Polymeropoulos et al., 1997; Spira et al., 2001;
Zarranz et al., 2004) as well as duplication and triplication of the gene (Singleton
et al., 2003). Second, oxidation of -synuclein leads to formation of aggregates and
filaments found to be a major component of LB (Giasson et al., 2000; Souza et al.,
2000). Third, -synuclein itself can activate microglia, causing release of ROS
and neurotoxicity (Thomas et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2005). Fourth, oxidized and
aggregated -synuclein, when released from dying neurons, may stimulate scavenger receptors on microglia resulting in their sustained activation and subsequent
dopaminergic neurodegeneration (Croisier et al., 2005; Wersinger and Sidhu, 2006;
Zhang et al., 2005). Taken together, several lines of research provide corroborating
evidence that implicate aggregation and oxidative modification of -synuclein as key
components that facilitate much of the neuroinflammation and degeneration in
sporadic and some familial forms of PD.

312

REYNOLDS et al.

Activated MPs are the primary perpetrators of neuronal injury in HIV-1associated CNS disease. It is widely accepted that these MPs act to induce
neuronal injury primarily through indirect mechanisms. These indirect mechanisms are alterations in secretory function of chemokines, cytokines, arachidonic
acid derivatives, and platelet-activating factor, as well as NO, free radicals, and
excitatory amino acids (Kadiu et al., 2005). Direct mechanisms also bring about
neurotoxicity, but probably play a lesser role. These mechanisms consist of soluble
viral proteins and glycoproteins that work through neuronal receptors (D’Aversa
et al., 2005). MP activation during HIV-1 infection may occur by several mechanisms. Proinflammatory cytokines, such as IFN- and TNF-, are potent MP
activators. TNF- allows astrocytes and microglia to amplify immune activation,
resulting in coactivation of other microglia. Axonal injury also results in activation
of MPs in the CNS. Chemokines are yet another method of macrophage activation. Macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP)-1 and RANTES (regulated on
activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted) act through CCR5 (Cocchi et al.,
1995) on the cell surface, and stromal cell–derived factor (SDF)-1 through
CXCR4 (Oberlin et al., 1996). Fractalkine, a brain chemokine expressed by
neurons, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, binds CX3CR1 to mediate macrophage recruitment and activation (Tong et al., 2000). T cells also activate MPs by
cytokines as well as direct contact. Activated T cells will enter the blast phase and
the CNS. As they migrate through the parenchyma, they secrete the cytokines
that serve as a source for microglia activation (Diesing et al., 2002; Lawrence and
Major, 2002). As these T cells die in the brain, the debris is removed by the brain
macrophages, also contributing to macrophage activation. Viral proteins such as
gp120 (Brenneman et al., 1988), gp41 (Adamson et al., 1996), and the nonstructural proteins Tat (New et al., 1997; Price et al., 2005), Nef, Vpr, and Rev secreted
by infected MP can (Price et al., 2006) directly disrupt glial and neuronal function
through alteration of calcium homeostasis (Lannuzel et al., 1995), induction of
ROS and RNS (Mollace et al., 1993), induction of apoptosis, or enhanced
secretion of proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF- and IL-1 as well as
arachidonic acid metabolites that are implicated in HIV-1 neuropathogenesis
( Jana and Pahan, 2004; Nath, 2002; Song et al., 2003).
The interplay between motorneurons and glia cells is important in the pathological progression of motorneuron diseases, and release of ROS and RNS
or cytokines form microglia could contribute to the demise of motorneurons as
seen in ALS (reviewed in Agar and Durham, 2003). The deposition of specific
proteins into intracellular hyaline inclusions in motorneurons and astrocytes is a
characteristic neuropathological finding in familial ALS as well as in sporadic
ALS (Kato et al., 2000; Shibata et al., 2000). These inclusions are strongly
immunopositive for both mutant and wild-type SOD1 in patients and transgenic
mice expressing mutated forms of human SOD1. Interestingly, mutant SOD1 is
more susceptible to oxidation-induced aggregation in vitro than the wild-type

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

313

enzyme (Rakhit et al., 2002). Furthermore, studies on mice-expressing mutated
human SOD1 revealed that elevated markers for activated microglia are present
at times of neuronal loss suggesting that activated microglia may contribute to the
oxidative insult. In addition to exogenous activators of microglia, microglia in
ALS may have intrinsic cytotoxic potential as a result of a defect in SOD1
function that becomes apparent following activation (Weydt et al., 2004). Therefore, in this context, mutant SOD1 renders microglia more susceptible to other
toxic agents that generate ROS (Liu et al., 1998).

VI. Growth Factors, Antioxidants, and Anti-Inflammatory Drug Therapies

Many diverse mechanisms, factors, and pathways are involved in neurodegenerative disorders; thus, several diVerent therapeutic methods have been developed to
target a specific factor or a whole intricate pathway with the intent of ameliorating,
preventing, or reversing neuronal cell damage (Tabner et al., 2001). Inflammation
and oxidative stress are both time and site specific, thus in order to treat the eVects of
these components on neurodegenerative disorders, knowing the temporal and
spatial activities involved in those processes is critical for development of eYcacious
therapeutics. Because inflammation and oxidative stress are linked, attenuation of
inflammatory responses could slow the neurodegenerative process. Therapeutic
paths could include neurotrophic factor enhancement (brain-derived neurotrophic
factor, glia cell line-derived neurotrophic factor, and nerve growth factor), upregulation of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4, IL-10, and TGF- ), inhibition of enzymatic activities that encourage neurotoxicity (GSK-3, -secretase), Ca2þ and
glutamate excitotoxicity blockers that inhibit NMDA receptor function, suppression
of neuronal cytotoxicity (memantine, lithium, sodium valproate), attenuation of
inflammation by NSAIDs, minocycline, dextromethorphan, and sequestering misfolded proteins with antibodies (Fig. 4A). Due in part to late diagnosis of the disease,
treatment is initiated well after neurodegeneration has started and its detrimental
eVects become symptomatic. The failure in late- or end-stage clinical trials of
promising therapeutic modalities emphasizes the need for presymptomatic
treatment.
Growing evidence suggests that, in disease, microglia may contribute to redox
stress by producing ROS during phagocytosis of debris from dying and degenerating neurons (Green et al., 2001; Qin et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2005).
As compensatory ionic fluxes are required to sustain ROS generation, characterization of the relative roles of plasma membrane ion currents in the generation of
ROS in response to pathological stimuli is important, with the long-term goal
of abrogating neuronal damage by modulating these fluxes during diseaseassociated microglial activation. Depending on the neuroinflammatory context,

314
A

REYNOLDS et al.

Resting
microglia
Neurotrophic
support

Neuron

NGF, BDNF,
GDNF

s
te
lina es
ino kin
qu cyto
,
F
y
PA ator te
E,
a
m
PG flam lutam
in
g
o
pr
es

Transformation

ve

ati

id
Ox

Immune
response modifiers
NSAID

ation
Activ ssion
re
supp

Minocycline

Neurotoxic
factor
suppression

Activated
microglia

Dextromethophan

str

Neuroprotection

Neuroprotectants
Memantine

Antioxidants

IFN-g transduction

Lithium
Superoxide
dismutase

g -Secretase
inhibitors

Sodium valproate

Catalase
Glutathion

B
Injured
neuron

Dopaminergic
neuron

T cell-derived
neurotrophic
support

Glial-derived
trophic
support
(GDNF)

Neurotrophic
support

Neurotoxicity
oxidative stress
Resting
microglia

IL-4, IL-10

Lymphocyte
recruitment

Astrocyte

Cop-1 reactive/
regulatory T cell

Cop-1 reactive/
regulatory
T cell infiltration

Activation
suppression

Reactice
microglia

IL-10
TGF-b

Activation
suppression

Effector T cell

FIG. 4. Putative therapeutic anti-inflammatory and antioxidant interventions for neurodegenerative diseases. (A) Induced neuronal inflammation can be attenuated by reduction or alterations in
neurodegenerative environmental cues (A, -synuclein, HIV, SOD-1) and from deactivation of
activated microglia via anti-inflammatory agents and reduction in neurotoxic ROS activities through
endogenous enzymes and exogenous vitamins responsible for stimulating antioxidants. (B) Immunomodulation using T cell–mediated therapies, such as immunization with Cop-1, has proven eYcacious
in a variety of neurological disorders. Whether Cop-1-mediated eVects are through modulation
of Th1/Th2 and regulatory T cell responses, or innate immunity to confer neuroprotection, the
underlying etiology of disease may dictate the cellular response.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

315

diVerent ionic conductances may play divergent roles that depend on unique
signaling pathways. Indeed, while direct activation of microglial NADPH oxidase
is mediated primarily through chloride currents, ROS production following microglial activation with aggregated -synuclein was predominately mediated through
voltage-activated Kþ currents or proton currents (Thomas et al., 2007). Therefore,
identification and blockade of specific ion channels may attenuate redox-related
stress and may slow disease progression in a variety of neuroinflammatory
conditions.

VII. Therapeutic Immunomodulation

T cell-mediated immune responses are another potential therapeutic avenue
for neurodegeneration. While naive T cells are precluded from CNS entry,
neuroinflammation aggressively recruits activated components of the adaptive
immune system to sites of active neurodegeneration. Investigations provide
evidence that a well-controlled response of activated T cells is neuroprotective
(Angelov et al., 2003; Benner et al., 2004; Butovsky et al., 2006b; Kipnis
and Schwartz, 2002; Kipnis et al., 2000). A generalized eYcacy for immunization
with Copolymer-1 (Cop-1, glatiramer acetate) in divergent models of human
neurological disorders including multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, glaucoma,
PD, AD, HAD, and ALS substantiates this observation (Arnon and Sela, 2003;
Benner et al., 2004; Butovsky et al., 2006a; Haenggeli et al., 2006; Kipnis et al.,
2000; Laurie et al., 2007). To date, the exact mechanism of action of Cop-1
is unknown. Possible mechanisms include preferential induction of a Th2
response, competition between Cop-1 and myelin basic protein for binding sites
on MHC class II molecules, or bystander suppression by a yet undefined mechanism. Cop-1 is a potent inducer of Th2 regulatory cells, which secrete IL-4, IL-5,
IL-10, and TGF- through induction of a cytokine shift (Aharoni et al., 2000).
Cop-1-induced Th2 adaptive immune responses can aVect microglial responses
and lead to neuroprotection in models of metabolic and traumatic disorders.
T cells reactive to Cop-1 could also be a source of brain-derived neurotrophic
factor and other neurotrophic factors (Arnon and Sela, 2003) or can induce
production of neurotrophins by microglia or astrocytes (Benner et al., 2004). Investigations in our laboratory and others have extended these observations
in deciphering mechanisms of Cop-1-mediated neuroprotection in animal models
of PD, AD, HAD, and ALS (Fig. 4B) (Benner et al., 2004; Butovsky et al.,
2006a; Haenggeli et al., 2006; Laurie et al., 2007). Parallel investigations suggest
that Cop-1 may induce the conversion of CD4þCD25 eVector T cells to CD4þ
CD25þ regulatory T cells (Hong et al., 2005). Indeed, an increased regulatory T cell

316

REYNOLDS et al.

population in Cop-1-immunized animals demonstrates a possible role for regulatory
T cells in neuroprotection.
Recent data generated in our laboratories demonstrated that regulatory
T cells can suppress microglial-mediated ROS production to near prestimulatory
levels in response to inflammatory activities including proinflammatory cytokines
(e.g., TNF- and LPS) (Fig. 5). These observations also support the notion that
therapeutic strategies that induce regulatory T cell responses can be used to
attenuate inflammation and promote neuronal survival for neurodegenerative
disorders. A therapeutic vaccine approach using Cop-1 in conjunction with
specific adjuvants that elicit specific regulatory T cell responses represents a
potential interdictory modality for slowing the progression of neuroinflammation

A
a

200

H2O2 (%)

150
b

100
50
0
CON

TNF-a

TNF-a/TREG

B
250

a

H2O2 (%)

200
150
b
100
50
0
CON

LPS

LPS/TREG

FIG. 5. CD4þCD25þ regulatory T cells attenuate microglial ROS production. ROS production
by microglia in response to inflammatory stimuli was measured with Amplex Red (Molecular Probes,
Carlsbad, CA). The total levels of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) were determined based on the conversion
of superoxide to H2O2 by horseradish peroxidase. Microglia produce copious amounts of ROS in
response to inflammatory stimuli such as TNF- (A) and LPS (B) (p < 0.01). Cocultivation of microglia
with regulatory T cells with inflammatory stimuli reduced the ROS response.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

317

and secondary neurodegeneration. This may be considered in conjunction
with other anti-inflammatory or antioxidant therapies as part of a broad based
therapeutic approach.

VIII. Summary

Thus, neurodegenerative disorders are strongly associated with inflammation
and oxidative stress. Ironically, although essential for life, ubiquitous oxygen
also is, by its products of metabolism, toxic to cells. Consequently, a strong
association exists between production of free radicals, aging, and neurodegenerative diseases. Oxidative stress has been correlated with the development of cellular
injuries leading to neuropathology in these various disease states. However,
whether oxidative stress is the primary force driving neurodegenerative disorders
is still unclear. A complete comprehension of the cellular and molecular mechanisms, and of the specificities of oxidative damage in these neurological disorders,
may lead to the development of therapeutic strategies to prevent or slow the
progression of disease.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Ms. Robin Taylor for excellent graphic and administrative assistance.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants that supported this work included P01 NS31492, R01
NS34239, P01 NS043985, and R37 NS36136 and P01 MH64570-03 (to H.E.G.) and R21 NS049264
(to R.L.M.).

References

Adamson, D. C., Wildmann, B., Sasaki, M., Glass, J. D., McArthur, J. C., Christov, V. I.,
Dawson, T. M., and Dawson, V. L. (1996). Immunologic NO synthase: Elevation in severe
AIDS and indection by HIV-1 gp41. Science 274, 1917–1921.
Adle-Biasette, H. (1999). Neuronal apoptosis does not correlate with dementia in HIV infection but is
related to microglial activation and axonal damage. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 25, 123–133.
Agar, J., and Durham, H. (2003). Relevance of oxidative injury in the pathogenesis of motor neuron
diseases. Amyotroph. Lateral. Scler. Other Motor Neuron Disord. 4, 232–242.
Aharoni, R., Teitelbaum, D., Leitner, O., Meshorer, A., Sela, M., and Arnon, R. (2000). Specific Th2
cells accumulate in the central nervous system of mice protected against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by copolymer 1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11472–11477.

318

REYNOLDS et al.

Andersen, J. K. (2004). Oxidative stress in neurodegeneration: Cause or consequence? Nat. Med.
10(Suppl.), S18–S25.
Andersen, P. M. (2001). Genetics of sporadic ALS. Amyotroph. Lateral. Scler. Other Motor Neuron Disord.
2(Suppl. 1), S37–S41.
Anderson, E., Zink, W., Xiong, H., and Gendelman, H. E. (2002). HIV-1-associated dementia:
A metabolic encephalopathy perpetrated by virus-infected and immune-competent mononuclear
phagocytes. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. 31(Suppl. 2), S43–S54.
Angelov, D. N., Waibel, S., Guntinas-Lichius, O., Lenzen, M., Neiss, W. F., Tomov, T. L., Yoles, E.,
Kipnis, J., Schori, H., Reuter, A., Ludolph, A., and Schwartz, M. (2003). Therapeutic vaccine for
acute and chronic motor neuron diseases: Implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 4790–4795.
Aquaro, S., Panti, S., Caroleo, M. C., Balestra, E., Cenci, A., Forbici, F., Ippolito, G., Mastino, A.,
Testi, R., Mollace, V., Calio, R., and Perno, C. F. (2000). Primary macrophages infected by
human immunodeficiency virus trigger CD95-mediated apoptosis of uninfected astrocytes.
J. Leukoc. Biol. 68, 429–435.
Arnon, R., and Sela, M. (2003). Immunomodulation by the copolymer glatiramer acetate. J. Mol.
Recognit. 16, 412–421.
Barzilai, A., Rotman, G., and Shiloh, Y. (2002). ATM deficiency and oxidative stress: A new dimension
of defective response to DNA damage. DNA Repair (Amst.) 1, 3–25.
Beal, M. F. (1995). Aging, energy, and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. Ann. Neurol. 38,
357–366.
Beckman, J. S. (1996). Oxidative damage and tyrosine nitration from peroxynitrite. Chem. Res. Toxicol.
9, 836–844.
Beckman, J. S., and Crow, J. P. (1993). Pathological implications of nitric oxide, superoxide and
peroxynitrite formation. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 21, 330–334.
Beckman, J. S., and Koppenol, W. H. (1996). Nitric oxide, superoxide, and peroxynitrite: The good,
the bad, and ugly. Am. J. Physiol. 271, C1424–C1437.
Benner, E. J., Mosley, R. L., Destache, C. J., Lewis, T. B., Jackson-Lewis, V., Gorantla, S.,
Nemachek, C., Green, S. R., Przedborski, S., and Gendelman, H. E. (2004). Therapeutic
immunization protects dopaminergic neurons in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101, 9435–9440.
Bianca, V. D., Dusi, S., Bianchini, E., Dal Pra, I., and Rossi, F. (1999). Beta-amyloid activates the O-2
forming NADPH oxidase in microglia, monocytes, and neutrophils. A possible inflammatory
mechanism of neuronal damage in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 15493–15499.
Brenneman, D., Westbrook, G. L., Fitzgerald, S. P., Ennist, D. L., Elkins, K. L., RuV, M. R., and
Pert, C. B. (1988). Neuronal cell killing by the envelope protein of HIV and its prevention by
vasoactive intestinal peptide. Nature 335, 639–642.
Bruijn, L. I., Miller, T. M., and Cleveland, D. W. (2004). Unraveling the mechanisms involved in
motor neuron degeneration in ALS. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 723–749.
Butovsky, O., Koronyo-Hamaoui, M., Kunis, G., Ophir, E., Landa, G., Cohen, H., and Schwartz, M.
(2006a). Glatiramer acetate fights against Alzheimer’s disease by inducing dendritic-like microglia
expressing insulin-like growth factor 1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 11784–11789.
Butovsky, O., Ziv, Y., Schwartz, A., Landa, G., Talpalar, A. E., Pluchino, S., Martino, G., and
Schwartz, M. (2006b). Microglia activated by IL-4 or IFN-gamma diVerentially induce neurogenesis and oligodendrogenesis from adult stem/progenitor cells. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 31, 149–160.
Carlson, K. A., Cotter, R., Williams, C. E., Branecki, C. E., Zheng, J., and Gendelman, H. E. (2002).
Macrophages and Alzheimer’s disease. In ‘‘The Macrophage’’ (B. Burke and C. Lewis, Eds.),
pp. 305–332. Oxford University Press, New York.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

319

Carri, M. T., Ferri, A., Cozzolino, M., Calabrese, L., and Rotilio, G. (2003). Neurodegeneration in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: The role of oxidative stress and altered homeostasis of metals. Brain
Res. Bull. 61, 365–374.
Castellani, R. J., Harris, P. L., Sayre, L. M., Fujii, J., Taniguchi, N., Vitek, M. P., Founds, H.,
Atwood, C. S., Perry, G., and Smith, M. A. (2001). Active glycation in neurofibrillary pathology
of Alzheimer disease: N(epsilon)-(carboxymethyl) lysine and hexitol-lysine. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
31, 175–180.
Chen, H., Zhang, S. M., Hernan, M. A., Schwarzschild, M. A., Willett, W. C., Colditz, G. A.,
Speizer, F. E., and Ascherio, A. (2003). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and the risk of
Parkinson disease. Arch. Neurol. 60, 1059–1064.
Chen, H., Jacobs, E., Schwarzschild, M. A., McCullough, M. L., Calle, E. E., Thun, M. J., and
Ascherio, A. (2005). Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use and the risk for Parkinson’s disease.
Ann. Neurol. 58, 963–967.
Chen, T. S., Richie, J. P., Jr., and Lang, C. A. (1989). The eVect of aging on glutathione and cysteine
levels in diVerent regions of the mouse brain. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 190, 399–402.
Choi, D. K., Pennathur, S., Perier, C., Tieu, K., Teismann, P., Wu, D. C., Jackson-Lewis, V., Vila, M.,
Vonsattel, J. P., Heinecke, J. W., and Przedborski, S. (2005). Ablation of the inflammatory
enzyme myeloperoxidase mitigates features of Parkinson’s disease in mice. J. Neurosci. 25,
6594–6660.
Cleveland, D. W., and Rothstein, J. D. (2001). From Charcot to Lou Gehrig: Deciphering selective
motor neuron death in ALS. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 806–819.
Cocchi, F., DeVico, A. L., Garzino-Demo, A., Arya, S. K., Gallo, R. C., and Lusso, P. (1995).
Identification of RANTES, MIP-1 alpha, and MIP-1 beta as the major HIV-suppressive factors
produced by CD8þ T cells. Science 270, 1811–1815.
Croisier, E., Moran, L. B., Dexter, D. T., Pearce, R. K., and Graeber, M. B. (2005). Microglial
inflammation in the parkinsonian substantia nigra: Relationship to alpha-synuclein deposition.
J. Neuroinflammation 2, 14.
Cudkowicz, M. E., McKenna-Yasek, D., Sapp, P. E., Chin, W., Geller, B., Hayden, D. L.,
Schoenfeld, D. A., Hosler, B. A., Horvitz, H. R., and Brown, R. H. (1997). Epidemiology of
mutations in superoxide dismutase in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann. Neurol. 41, 210–221.
d’Arminio Monforte, A., Duca, P. G., Vago, L., Grassi, M. P., and Moroni, M. (2000). Decreasing
incidence of CNS AIDS-defining events associated with antiretroviral therapy. Neurology 54,
1856–1859.
D’Aversa, T. G., Eugenin, E. A., and Berman, J. W. (2005). NeuroAIDS: Contributions of the human
immunodeficiency virus-1 proteins Tat and gp120 as well as CD40 to microglial activation.
J. Neurosci. Res. 81, 436–446.
Dauer, W., and Przedborski, S. (2003). Parkinson’s disease: Mechanisms and models. Neuron 39,
889–909.
Dawson, T. M., and Dawson, V. L. (2003). Molecular pathways of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s
disease. Science 302, 819–822.
de Belleroche, J., Orrell, R. W., and Virgo, L. (1996). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: Recent advances in
understanding disease mechanisms. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 55, 747–757.
Deng, H. X., Hentati, A., Tainer, J. A., Iqbal, Z., Cayabyab, A., Hung, W. Y., GetzoV, E. D., Hu, P.,
Herzfeldt, B., Roos, R. P., et al. (1993). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and structural defects in Cu,
Zn superoxide dismutase. Science 261, 1047–1051.
Diesing, T. S., Swindells, S., Gelbard, H., and Gendelman, H. E. (2002). HIV-1-associated dementia:
A basic science and clinical perspective. AIDS Read. 12, 358–368.
Dringen, R., Gutterer, J. M., and Hirrlinger, J. (2000). Glutathione metabolism in brain metabolic
interaction between astrocytes and neurons in the defense against reactive oxygen species. Eur.
J. Biochem. 267, 4912–4916.

320

REYNOLDS et al.

Du, Y., Ma, Z., Lin, S., Dodel, R. C., Gao, F., Bales, K. R., Triarhou, L. C., Chernet, E., Perry, K. W.,
Nelson, D. L., Luecke, S., Phebus, L. A., et al. (2001). Minocycline prevents nigrostriatal
dopaminergic neurodegeneration in the MPTP model of Parkinson’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 98, 14669–14674.
Elbim, C., Pillet, S., Prevost, M. H., Preira, A., Girard, P. M., Rogine, N., Hakim, J., Israel, N., and
Gougerot-Pocidalo, M. A. (2001). The role of phagocytes in HIV-related oxidative stress. J. Clin.
Virol. 20, 99–109.
Ensoli, F., Fiorelli, V., De Cristofaro, M., Muratori, D. S., Novi, A., Isgro, A., and Aiuti, F. (2000). Role
of immune-derived diVusible mediators in AIDS-associated neurological disorders. Arch. Immunol.
Ther. Exp. (Warsz.) 48, 259–266.
Floyd, R. A., Hensley, K., JaVery, F., Maidt, L., Robinson, K., Pye, Q., and Stewart, C. (1999).
Increased oxidative stress brought on by pro-inflammatory cytokines in neurodegenerative
processes and the protective role of nitrone-based free radical traps. Life Sci. 65, 1893–1899.
Forman, M. S., Trojanowski, J. Q., and Lee, V. M. (2004). Neurodegenerative diseases: A decade of
discoveries paves the way for therapeutic breakthroughs. Nat. Med. 10, 1055–1063.
Gaudette, M., Hirano, M., and Siddique, T. (2000). Current status of SOD1 mutations in familial
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph. Lateral. Scler. Other Motor Neuron Disord. 1, 83–99.
Gendelman, H. E., Zheng, J., Coulter, C. L., Ghorpade, A., Che, M., Thylin, M., Rubocki, R.,
Persidsky, Y., Hahn, F., Reinhard, J., Jr., and Swindells, S. (1998). Suppression of inflammatory
neurotoxins by highly active antiretroviral therapy in human immunodeficiency virus-associated
dementia. J. Infect. Dis. 178, 1000–1007.
Giasson, B. I., Duda, J. E., Murray, I. V., Chen, Q., Souza, J. M., Hurtig, H. I., Ischiropoulos, H.,
Trojanowski, J. Q., and Lee, V. M. (2000). Oxidative damage linked to neurodegeneration by
selective alpha-synuclein nitration in synucleinopathy lesions. Science 290, 985–989.
Giulian, D., Haverkamp, L. J., Li, J., Karshin, W. L., Yu, J., Tom, D., Li, X., and Kirkpatrick, J. B.
(1995). Senile plaques stimulate microglia to release a neurotoxin found in Alzheimer brain.
Neurochem. Int. 27, 119–137.
Goodwin, J. L., Uemura, E., and Cunnick, J. E. (1995). Microglial release of nitric oxide by the
synergistic action of beta-amyloid and IFN-gamma. Brain Res. 692, 207–214.
Gras, G., Chretien, F., Vallat-Decouvelaere, A. V., Le Pavec, G., Porcheray, F., Bossuet, C., Leone, C.,
Mialocq, P., Dereuddre-Bosquet, N., Clayette, P., Le Grand, R., Creminon, C., et al. (2003).
Regulated expression of sodium-dependent glutamate transporters and synthetase: A neuroprotective role for activated microglia and macrophages in HIV infection? Brain Pathol. 13, 211–222.
Gras, G., Porcheray, F., Samah, B., and Leone, C. (2006). The glutamate-glutamine cycle as an
inducible, protective face of macrophage activation. J. Leukoc. Biol. 80, 1067–1075.
Green, S. P., Cairns, B., Rae, J., Errett-Baroncini, C., Hongo, J. A., Erickson, R. W., and
Curnutte, J. T. (2001). Induction of gp91-phox, a component of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase,
in microglial cells during central nervous system inflammation. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 21,
374–384.
Guegan, C., and Przedborski, S. (2003). Programmed cell death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
J. Clin. Invest. 111, 153–161.
Haase, A. T. (1999). Population biology of HIV-1 infection: Viral and CD4þ T cell demographics and
dynamics in lymphatic tissues. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 17, 625–656.
Haenggeli, C., Julien, J. P., Lee Mosley, R., Perez, N., Dhar, A., Gendelman, H. E., and
Rothstein, J. D. (2006). Therapeutic immunization with a glatiramer acetate derivative does not
alter survival in G93A and G37R SOD1 mouse models of familial ALS. Neurobiol. Dis. 26,
146–152.
Ho, D. D., Neumann, A. U., Perelson, A. S., Chen, W., Leonard, J. M., and Markowitz, M. (1995).
Rapid turnover of plasma virions and CD4 lymphocytes in HIV-1 infection. Nature 373, 123–126.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

321

Hong, J., Li, N., Zhang, X., Zheng, B., and Zhang, J. Z. (2005). Induction of CD4þCD25þ
regulatory T cells by copolymer-I through activation of transcription factor Foxp3. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 102, 6449–6454.
Jana, A., and Pahan, K. (2004). Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 induces apoptosis in
human primary neurons through redox-regulated activation of neutral sphingomyelinase.
J. Neurosci. 24, 9531–9540.
Jiang, Z. G., Piggee, C., Heyes, M. P., Murphy, C., Quearry, B., Bauer, M., Zheng, J.,
Gendelman, H. E., and Markey, S. P. (2001). Glutamate is a mediator of neurotoxicity in
secretions of activated HIV-1-infected macrophages. J. Neuroimmunol. 117, 97–107.
Kadiu, I., Glanzer, J. G., Kipnis, J., Gendelman, H. E., and Thomas, M. P. (2005). Mononuclear
phagocytes in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. Neurotox. Res. 8, 25–50.
Kato, S., Takikawa, M., Nakashima, K., Hirano, A., Cleveland, D. W., Kusaka, H., Shibata, N.,
Kato, M., Nakano, I., and Ohama, E. (2000). New consensus research on neuropathological
aspects of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene mutations: Inclusions containing SOD1 in neurons and astrocytes. Amyotroph. Lateral. Scler. Other Motor
Neuron Disord. 1, 163–184.
Kaul, M., Garden, G. A., and Lipton, S. A. (2001). Pathways to neuronal injury and apoptosis in HIVassociated dementia. Nature 410, 988–994.
Kipnis, J., and Schwartz, M. (2002). Dual action of glatiramer acetate (Cop-1) in the treatment of CNS
autoimmune and neurodegenerative disorders. Trends Mol. Med. 8, 319–323.
Kipnis, J., Yoles, E., Porat, Z., Cohen, A., Mor, F., Sela, M., Cohen, I. R., and Schwartz, M. (2000).
T cell immunity to copolymer 1 confers neuroprotection on the damaged optic nerve: Possible
therapy for optic neuropathies. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 7446–7451.
Klegeris, A., Walker, D. G., and McGeer, P. L. (1997a). Interaction of Alzheimer beta-amyloid peptide
with the human monocytic cell line THP-1 results in a protein kinase C-dependent secretion of
tumor necrosis factor-alpha. Brain Res. 747, 114–121.
Klegeris, A., Walker, D. G., and McGeer, P. L. (1997b). Regulation of glutamate in cultures of human
monocytic THP-1 and astrocytoma U-373 MG cells. J. Neuroimmunol. 78, 152–161.
Kohutnicka, M., Lewandowska, E., Kurkowska-Jastrzebska, I., Czlonkowski, A., and Czlonkowska, A.
(1998). Microglial and astrocytic involvement in a murine model of Parkinson’s disease induced by
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). Immunopharmacology 39, 167–180.
Krishnakumar, D. (2005). ‘‘Immunology of HIV-1.’’ Oxford University Press, New York.
Kruger, R., Kuhn, W., Muller, T., Woitalla, D., Graeber, M., Kosel, S., Przuntek, H., Epplen, J. T.,
Schols, L., and Riess, O. (1998). Ala30Pro mutation in the gene encoding alpha-synuclein in
Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Genet. 18, 106–108.
Kurkowska-Jastrzebska, I., Wronska, A., Kohutnicka, M., Czlonkowski, A., and Czlonkowska, A.
(1999). The inflammatory reaction following 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine intoxication in mouse. Exp. Neurol. 156, 50–61.
Lannuzel, A., Lledo, P. M., Lamghitnia, H. O., Vincent, J. D., and Tardieu, M. (1995). HIV-1
envelope proteins gp120 and gp160 potentiate NMDA-induced [Ca2þ]i increase, alter [Ca2þ]i
homeostasis and induce neurotoxicity in human embryonic neurons. Eur. J. Neurosci. 7,
2285–2293.
Lass, A., Agarwal, S., and Sohal, R. S. (1997). Mitochondrial ubiquinone homologues, superoxide
radical generation, and longevity in diVerent mammalian species. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 19199–19204.
Laurie, C., Reynolds, A., Cuskun, O., Bowman, E., Gendelman, H. E., and Mosley, R. L. (2007). CD4
þ T cells from Copolymer-1 immunized mice protect dopaminergic neurons in the 1-methyl-4phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuroimmunol. 183, 60–68.
Lawrence, D. M., and Major, E. O. (2002). HIV-1 and the brain: Connections between HIV-1associated dementia, neuropathology and neuroimmunology. Microbes Infect. 4, 301–308.

322

REYNOLDS et al.

Liu, Y., Brooks, B. R., Taniguchi, N., and Hartmann, H. A. (1998). CuZnSOD and MnSOD
immunoreactivity in brain stem motor neurons from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Acta
Neuropathol. (Berl.) 95, 63–70.
Luo, X., Carlson, K. A., Wojna, V., Mayo, R., Biskup, T. M., Stoner, J., Anderson, J.,
Gendelman, H. E., and Melendez, L. M. (2003). Macrophage proteomic fingerprinting predicts
HIV-1-associated cognitive impairment. Neurology 60, 1931–1937.
Lyons, T. J., Gralla, E. B., and Valentine, J. S. (1999). Biological chemistry of copper-zinc superoxide
dismutase and its link to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Met. Ions Biol. Syst. 36, 125–177.
Markesbery, W. R., and Carney, J. M. (1999). Oxidative alterations in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain
Pathol. 9, 133–146.
Markesbery, W. R., and Mira, S. (1996). ‘‘Alzheimer’s Disease-Cause(s), Diagnosis, Treatment, and
Care.’’ CRC Press, New York.
Mattson, M. P., Barger, S. W., Furukawa, K., Bruce, A. J., Wyss-Coray, T., Mark, R. J., and Mucke, L.
(1997). Cellular signaling roles of TGF beta, TNF alpha and beta APP in brain injury responses
and Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 23, 47–61.
McDonald, D. R., Brunden, K. R., and Landreth, G. E. (1997). Amyloid fibrils activate tyrosine
kinase-dependent signaling and superoxide production in microglia. J. Neurosci. 17, 2284–2294.
McGeer, P. L., and McGeer, E. G. (2002a). Inflammatory processes in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Muscle Nerve 26, 459–470.
McGeer, P. L., and McGeer, E. G. (2002b). Local neuroinflammation and the progression of
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurovirol. 8, 529–538.
McGeer, P. L., Itagaki, S., Boyes, B. E., and McGeer, E. G. (1988). Reactive microglia are positive for
HLA-DR in the substantia nigra of Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease brains. Neurology 38,
1285–1291.
Meda, L., Bernasconi, S., Bonaiuto, C., Sozzani, S., Zhou, D., Otvos, L., Jr., Mantovani, A., Rossi, F.,
and Cassatella, M. A. (1996). Beta-amyloid (25–35) peptide and IFN-gamma synergistically
induce the production of the chemotactic cytokine MCP-1/JE in monocytes and microglial
cells. J. Immunol. 157, 1213–1218.
Mollace, V., and Nistico, G. (1995). Release of nitric oxide from astroglial cells: A key mechanism in
neuroimmune disorders. Adv. Neuroimmunol. 5, 421–430.
Mollace, V., Colasanti, M., Persichini, T., Bagetta, G., Lauro, G. M., and Nistico, G. (1993). HIV
gp120 glycoprotein stimulates the inducible isoform of no synthase in human cultured astrocytoma cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 194, 439–445.
Mollace, V., Nottet, H. S., Clayette, P., Turco, M. C., Muscoli, C., Salvemini, D., and Perno, C. F.
(2001). Oxidative stress and neuroAIDS: Triggers, modulators and novel antioxidants. Trends
Neurosci. 24, 411–416.
Nath, A. (2002). Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) proteins in neuropathogenesis of HIV
dementia. J. Infect. Dis. 186(Suppl. 2), S193–S198.
New, D., Ma, M., Epstein, L. G., Nath, A., and Gelbard, H. A. (1997). Human immunodeficiency
virus type-1 tat protein induces death by apoptosis in primary human neuron cultures.
J. Neurovirol. 3, 168–173.
Norris, E. H., Giasson, B. I., Ischiropoulos, H., and Lee, V. M. (2003). EVects of oxidative and nitrative
challenges on alpha-synuclein fibrillogenesis involve distinct mechanisms of protein modifications.
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 27230–27240.
Nunomura, A., Perry, G., Pappolla, M. A., Wade, R., Hirai, K., Chiba, S., and Smith, M. A. (1999).
RNA oxidation is a prominent feature of vulnerable neurons in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci.
19, 1959–1964.
Nunomura, A., Perry, G., Pappolla, M. A., Friedland, R. P., Hirai, K., Chiba, S., and Smith, M. A. (2000).
Neuronal oxidative stress precedes amyloid-beta deposition in Down syndrome. J. Neuropathol.
Exp. Neurol. 59, 1011–1017.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

323

Nunomura, A., Perry, G., Aliev, G., Hirai, K., Takeda, A., Balraj, E. K., Jones, P. K., Ghanbari, H.,
Wataya, T., Shimohama, S., Chiba, S., Atwood, C. S., et al. (2001). Oxidative damage is the
earliest event in Alzheimer disease. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 60, 759–767.
Oberlin, E., Amara, A., Bachelerie, F., Bessia, C., Virelizier, J. L., Arenzana-Seisdedos, F.,
Schwartz, O., Heard, J. M., Clark-Lewis, I., Legler, D. F., Loetscher, M., Baggiolini, M., et al.
(1996). The CXC chemokine SDF-1 is the ligand for LESTR/fusin and prevents infection by
T-cell-line-adapted HIV-1. Nature 382, 833–835.
Olanow, C. W. (1993). A radical hypothesis for neurodegeneration. Trends Neurosci. 16, 439–444.
Piani, D., Spranger, M., Frei, K., SchaVner, A., and Fontana, A. (1992). Macrophage-induced
cytotoxicity of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor positive neurons involves excitatory amino acids
rather than reactive oxygen intermediates and cytokines. Eur. J. Immunol. 22, 2429–2436.
Polymeropoulos, M. H., Lavedan, C., Leroy, E., Ide, S. E., Dehejia, A., Dutra, A., Pike, B., Root, H.,
Rubenstein, J., Boyer, R., Stenroos, E. S., Chandrasekharappa, S., et al. (1997). Mutation in the
alpha-synuclein gene identified in families with Parkinson’s disease. Science 276, 2045–2047.
Pratico, D., and Delanty, N. (2000). Oxidative injury in diseases of the central nervous system: Focus
on Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Med. 109, 577–585.
Price, T. O., Ercal, N., Nakaoke, R., and Banks, W. A. (2005). HIV-1 viral proteins gp120 and Tat
induce oxidative stress in brain endothelial cells. Brain Res. 1045, 57–63.
Price, T. O., Uras, F., Banks, W. A., and Ercal, N. (2006). A novel antioxidant N-acetylcysteine amide
prevents gp120- and Tat-induced oxidative stress in brain endothelial cells. Exp. Neurol. 201,
193–202.
Qin, L., Liu, Y., Wang, T., Wei, S. J., Block, M. L., Wilson, B., Liu, B., and Hong, J. S. (2004).
NADPH oxidase mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced neurotoxicity and proinflammatory gene
expression in activated microglia. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 1415–1421.
Raber, J., Sorg, O., Horn, T. F., Yu, N., Koob, G. F., Campbell, I. L., and Bloom, F. E. (1998).
Inflammatory cytokines: Putative regulators of neuronal and neuro-endocrine function. Brain Res.
Brain Res. Rev. 26, 320–326.
Rakhit, R., Cunningham, P., Furtos-Matei, A., Dahan, S., Qi, X. F., Crow, J. P., Cashman, N. R.,
Kondejewski, L. H., and Chakrabartty, A. (2002). Oxidation-induced misfolding and aggregation
of superoxide dismutase and its implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
47551–47556.
Reiter, R. J. (1995). Oxidative processes and antioxidative defense mechanisms in the aging brain.
FASEB J. 9, 526–533.
Rosen, D. R., Siddique, T., Patterson, D., Figlewicz, D. A., Sapp, P., Hentati, A., Donaldson, D., Goto, J.,
O’Regan, J. P., Deng, H. X., Rahmani, Z., Krizus, A., et al. (1993). Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide
dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 362, 59–62.
Rowland, L. P., and Shneider, N. A. (2001). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 344,
1688–1700.
Shefner, J. M., Reaume, A. G., Flood, D. G., Scott, R. W., Kowall, N. W., Ferrante, R. J., Siwek, D. F.,
Upton-Rice, M., and Brown, R. H., Jr. (1999). Mice lacking cytosolic copper/zinc superoxide
dismutase display a distinctive motor axonopathy. Neurology 53, 1239–1246.
Shibata, N., Hirano, A., Yamamoto, T., Kato, Y., and Kobayashi, M. (2000). Superoxide dismutase-1
mutation-related neurotoxicity in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Amyotroph. Lateral. Scler.
Other Motor Neuron Disord. 1, 143–161.
Sian, J., Dexter, D. T., Lees, A. J., Daniel, S., Agid, Y., Javoy-Agid, F., Jenner, P., and Marsden, C. D.
(1994). Alterations in glutathione levels in Parkinson’s disease and other neurodegenerative
disorders aVecting basal ganglia. Ann. Neurol. 36, 348–355.
Simantov, R. (1989). Glutamate neurotoxicity in culture depends on the presence of glutamine:
Implications for the role of glial cells in normal and pathological brain development. J. Neurochem.
52, 1694–1699.

324

REYNOLDS et al.

Singleton, A. B., Farrer, M., Johnson, J., Singleton, A., Hague, S., Kachergus, J., Hulihan, M.,
Peuralinna, T., Dutra, A., Nussbaum, R., Lincoln, S., Crawley, A., et al. (2003). Alpha-Synuclein
locus triplication causes Parkinson’s disease. Science 302, 841.
Sipe, J. D., and Cohen, A. S. (2000). Review: History of the amyloid fibril. J. Struct. Biol. 130, 88–98.
Smith, M. A., Richey Harris, P. L., Sayre, L. M., Beckman, J. S., and Perry, G. (1997). Widespread
peroxynitrite-mediated damage in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 17, 2653–2657.
Song, L., Nath, A., Geiger, J. D., Moore, A., and Hochman, S. (2003). Human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 Tat protein directly activates neuronal N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors at an allosteric
zinc-sensitive site. J. Neurovirol. 9, 399–403.
Souza, J. M., Giasson, B. I., Chen, Q., Lee, V. M., and Ischiropoulos, H. (2000). Dityrosine crosslinking promotes formation of stable alpha -synuclein polymers. Implication of nitrative and
oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative synucleinopathies. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
18344–18349.
Spira, P. J., Sharpe, D. M., Halliday, G., Cavanagh, J., and Nicholson, G. A. (2001). Clinical and
pathological features of a Parkinsonian syndrome in a family with an Ala53Thr alpha-synuclein
mutation. Ann. Neurol. 49, 313–319.
Strong, M. J. (2003). The basic aspects of therapeutics in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Pharmacol. Ther.
98, 379–414.
Tabner, B. J., Turnbull, S., El-Agnaf, O., and Allsop, D. (2001). Production of reactive oxygen species
from aggregating proteins implicated in Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease and other
neurodegenerative diseases. Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 1, 507–517.
Tabner, B. J., El-Agnaf, O. M., German, M. J., Fullwood, N. J., and Allsop, D. (2005). Protein
aggregation, metals and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 33,
1082–1086.
Tardieu, M., and Boutet, A. (2002). HIV-1 and the central nervous system. Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.
265, 183–195.
Teismann, P., and Ferger, B. (2001). Inhibition of the cyclooxygenase isoenzymes COX-1 and COX-2
provide neuroprotection in the MPTP-mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Synapse 39, 167–174.
Teismann, P., Tieu, K., Choi, D. K., Wu, D. C., Naini, A., Hunot, S., Vila, M., Jackson-Lewis, V., and
Przedborski, S. (2003). Cyclooxygenase-2 is instrumental in Parkinson’s disease neurodegeneration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA 100, 5473–5478.
Thomas, M. P., Chartrand, K., Reynolds, A., Vitvitsky, V., Banerjee, R., and Gendelman, H. E.
(2007). Ion channel blockade attenuates aggregated alpha synuclein induction of microglial
reactive oxygen species: Relevance for the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurochem.
100, 503–519.
Tong, N., Perry, S. W., Zhang, Q., James, H. J., Guo, H., Brooks, A., Bal, H., Kinnear, S. A., Fine, S.,
Epstein, L. G., Dairaghi, D., Schall, T. J., et al. (2000). Neuronal fractalkine expression in HIV-1
encephalitis: Roles for macrophage recruitment and neuroprotection in the central nervous
system. J. Immunol. 164, 1333–1339.
Valentine, J. S. (2002). Do oxidatively modified proteins cause ALS? Free Radic. Biol. Med. 33,
1314–1320.
Van Muiswinkel, F. L., Raupp, S. F., de Vos, N. M., Smits, H. A., Verhoef, J., Eikelenboom, P., and
Nottet, H. S. (1999). The amino-terminus of the amyloid-beta protein is critical for the cellular
binding and consequent activation of the respiratory burst of human macrophages.
J. Neuroimmunol. 96, 121–130.
Vijitruth, R., Liu, M., Choi, D. Y., Nguyen, X. V., Hunter, R. L., and Bing, G. (2006). Cyclooxygenase-2 mediates microglial activation and secondary dopaminergic cell death in the mouse MPTP
model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neuroinflammation 3, 6–28.
Vila, M., and Przedborski, S. (2004). Genetic clues to the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Nat. Med.
10(Suppl.), S58–S62.

OXIDATIVE STRESS AND NEURODEGENERATION

325

Wei, X., Ghosh, S. K., Taylor, M. E., Johnson, V. A., Emini, E. A., Deutsch, P., Lifson, J. D.,
BonhoeVer, S., Nowak, M. A., Hahn, B. H., Saag, M. S., and Shaw, G. M. (1995). Viral dynamics
in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. Nature 373, 117–122.
Wersinger, C., and Sidhu, A. (2006). An inflammatory pathomechanism for Parkinson’s disease? Curr.
Med. Chem. 13, 591–602.
Weydt, P., and Moller, T. (2005). Neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Neuroreport 16, 527–531.
Weydt, P., Weiss, M. D., Moller, T., and Carter, G. T. (2002). Neuro-inflammation as a therapeutic
target in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Curr. Opin. Investig. Drugs 3, 1720–1724.
Weydt, P., Yuen, E. C., Ransom, B. R., and Moller, T. (2004). Increased cytotoxic potential of
microglia from ALS-transgenic mice. Glia 48, 179–182.
Winterbourn, C. C., and Metodiewa, D. (1994). The reaction of superoxide with reduced glutathione.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 314, 284–290.
Wu, D. C., Jackson-Lewis, V., Vila, M., Tieu, K., Teismann, P., Vadseth, C., Choi, D. K.,
Ischiropoulos, H., and Przedborski, S. (2002). Blockade of microglial activation is neuroprotective in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine mouse model of Parkinson disease.
J. Neurosci. 22, 1763–1771.
Xiong, H., Zeng, Y. C., Lewis, T., Zheng, J., Persidsky, Y., and Gendelman, H. E. (2000). HIV-1
infected mononuclear phagocyte secretory products aVect neuronal physiology leading to cellular
demise: Relevance for HIV-1-associated dementia. J. Neurovirol. 6(Suppl. 1), S14–S23.
Yamada, T., McGeer, P. L., and McGeer, E. G. (1992). Appearance of paired nucleated, Tau-positive
glia in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy brain tissue. Neurosci. Lett. 135, 99–102.
Yong, V. W., Power, C., Forsyth, P., and Edwards, D. R. (2001). Metalloproteinases in biology and
pathology of the nervous system. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 502–511.
Zarranz, J. J., Alegre, J., Gomez-Esteban, J. C., Lezcano, E., Ros, R., Ampuero, I., Vidal, L.,
Hoenicka, J., Rodriguez, O., Atares, B., Llorens, V., Gomez Tortosa, E., et al. (2004). The
new mutation, E46K, of alpha-synuclein causes Parkinson and Lewy body dementia. Ann. Neurol.
55, 164–173.
Zhang, W., Wang, T., Pei, Z., Miller, D. S., Wu, X., Block, M. L., Wilson, B., Zhang, W., Zhou, Y.,
Hong, J. S., and Zhang, J. (2005). Aggregated alpha-synuclein activates microglia: A process
leading to disease progression in Parkinson’s disease. FASEB J. 19, 533–542.
Zhu, X., Raina, A. K., Lee, H. G., Casadesus, G., Smith, M. A., and Perry, G. (2004). Oxidative stress
signalling in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. 1000, 32–39.

