Review
Central & Peripheral Nervous Systems

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Potential therapeutic targets
for Parkinson’s disease
A Jon Stoessl

1.

Introduction

2.

Disability arising from
non-dopaminergic
mechanisms in PD

3.

Complications of
dopaminergic therapy

4.

Approaches to the modification
of disease progression

5.

Potential gene therapy
targets for PD

6.

Other needs for therapeutic
target development

7.

Expert opinion

University of British Columbia and Vancouver Coastal Health, Pacific Parkinson’s Research
Centre & National Parkinson Foundation Centre of Excellence, 2221 Wesbrook Mall,
Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada

Background: Parkinson’s disease is a common disorder that becomes more
prevalent with advanced age. The cardinal features are related to
dopamine deficiency, arising from loss of neurons projecting from the
substantia nigra in the midbrain to the striatum. Therapies based on
dopamine replacement are well established but while highly effective,
leave a number of currently unmet needs. These include features of disease
that are probably not related to dopamine deficiency and are unresponsive
to dopamine-replacement therapy, as well as complications of long-term
dopaminergic therapy itself. The most important gap is the availability of
treatments that modify the inexorable progression of disease or that could
prevent its onset in subjects at risk. Objective: To identify needs that
are unmet or only partially addressed by currently available therapies
for Parkinson’s and select approaches that may be helpful for their
management. Methods: Discussion of the mechanisms that may contribute
to currently unmet needs in Parkinson’s disease. Based on consideration
of pathogenic mechanisms and a review of recent and previous relevant
literature, identification of possible approaches that are in development,
including pharmacological strategies and potential targets for gene
therapy. Conclusions: Better treatments for levodopa-unresponsive aspects of
Parkinson’s will depend upon improved understanding of the pathophysiology
of these complications. Dopamine-based therapies have been extensively
developed and further improvements in treatment of established disease
are likely to be based on modification of other neurotransmitter systems,
including 5-hydroxytryptamine, adenosine receptors, amino acid receptors
and possibly neuropeptides. The failure of neuroprotective and neurorescue
strategies to keep pace with expectations probably reflects a combination
of inadequate models of disease pathogenesis and poor biomarkers
to assess the impact of these interventions. The development of novel
therapies will be heavily dependent on improvements in these arenas. Most
gene therapies under development will address the symptoms of Parkinson’s
disease but will at best only partially address the underlying disease.
Keywords: 5-hydroxytryptamine, adenosine receptors, animal models, apoptosis,
biomarkers, dementia, dopamine, dyskinesias, excitatory amino acids, gene therapy,
glutamic acid decarboxylase, kinase, mitochondria, neuroprotection, neurotrophins,
Parkinson’s, protein aggregation, ubiquitin-proteasome system
Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4):425-436

1. Introduction

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder,
estimated to affect from 200 – 300 per 100,000 population and at least 1% of
people age 65 or more. Although PD remains a serious source of disability,
the ability to limit its impact was revolutionized nearly 50 years ago with the
10.1517/14728222.12.4.425 © 2008 Informa UK Ltd ISSN 1472-8222

425

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Potential therapeutic targets for Parkinson’s disease

demonstration that the primary symptoms could be
adequately treated by the dopamine precursor levodopa.
Despite early difficulties with levodopa therapy, it is now
firmly established as the most effective and probably overall
best tolerated symptomatic treatment when combined with
a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor. However, despite
(indeed probably because of ) the profound impact levodopa
has had on survival and quality of life in PD, its deficiencies
have become more apparent as people live longer.
Levodopa is extremely effective for treating the rigidity
and bradykinesia of PD and in many patients, the tremor as
well. However, there remain core features that are minimally
or not at all responsive to levodopa. These include speech
and postural disturbances, autonomic dysfunction and
cognitive impairment that may over time affect a majority
of patients. To a certain extent, these problems may reflect
involvement of non-dopaminergic neurons. For instance,
while other mechanisms may play a role, dementia in PD is
associated with loss of cholinergic innervation of cerebral
cortex and may respond (as do visual hallucinations) at least
in part to cholinesterase inhibitors. The basis for depression
in PD is not established but could reflect loss of dopamine
projections to limbic circuitry as well as involvement of
other monoaminergic neurons such as serotonergic neurons
of the brainstem. Other complications such as hypophonia
and postural instability are probably multifactorial and
while they may respond somewhat to dopamine replacement
therapy, non-medical approaches such as voice training
or physiotherapy may be more effective. Ultimately,
however, better therapy for these important complications
will require a better understanding of the underlying
pathophysiological mechanisms.
Secondly, levodopa and other dopaminergic therapies are
themselves associated with numerous complications over
long-term usage [1,2]. Some of these, such as fluctuations in
motor response and involuntary movements or dyskinesias,
are probably related to an interaction between the disease
itself and the therapy. Thus, dyskinesias are unlikely to
occur in non-parkinsonian individuals exposed to levodopa.
Others, such as confusion, hallucinations, psychosis and
pathological behaviours such as punding, compulsive
drug use and gambling [3], while quite possibly modified
by the disease process, could presumably occur in any
prone individual taking dopaminergic medication.
Finally, and most obviously, levodopa and other
dopaminergic medications have no impact on the inexorable
progression of PD, apart from their clear ability to prolong
life. Previous concerns that levodopa might actually hasten
the progression of PD have proved to be unfounded [4].
Likewise, claims that dopamine agonists may be associated
with a slower rate of disease progression than levodopa
have been based entirely on the use of neuroimaging as
a surrogate marker of disease severity and have not been
supported by the available clinical data [5,6]. Open-label
follow-up has suggested that patients treated with the
426

propargylamine monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor rasagiline
following a 6-month delay in initiation of therapy did not
attain the same degree of improvement as those treated with
active medication from the start [7]. This may be interpreted
as evidence of neuroprotective effects, in keeping with
earlier suggestions of disease modifying effects from this
class of drugs [8,9] but the latter trials have been confounded
by concerns regarding symptomatic benefit.
In this review, the author will consider potential targets
in each of these three categories.
2. Disability arising from non-dopaminergic
mechanisms in PD
2.1 Speech

Speech is commonly affected in PD, with low volume, loss
of prosody and a tendency to hasten, with progressive
decline in volume and clarity (‘festination’ of speech).
Although it is widely held that the speech deficits of PD are
resistant to levodopa, some measures of clarity and prosody
are improved with medication [10-12]. Surgery is similarly
generally unhelpful and may indeed result in profound
hypophonia or aphonia (particularly bilateral thalamotomy
or pallidotomy) but in some cases, although usually deemed
unhelpful [13], deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) has been beneficial [12,14].
Modification of speech (Lee Silverman Voice Therapy) is
widely accepted and benefits have been demonstrated in a
limited number of controlled trials [15,16]. As the basis
for speech deficits in PD is poorly understood and the
impairment of communication represents a major source
of disability for both patients and those close to them,
any therapeutic development in this area would be seen
as a major development.
2.2 Postural instability

Postural instability is one of the cardinal features of PD but
by definition does not appear until later stages. Although
generally regarded as relatively unresponsive to dopaminergic
therapy, its appearance is also universally seen as a clear indication for the initiation of levodopa in patients not already
taking this medication. The basis for postural instability in
PD is not well established. Secondary changes in inputs to
other basal ganglia structures such as the pallidum and superior
colliculus may be important, as are abnormalities in sensory
and attentional processing. However, recent reports of benefit
following high frequency stimulation of the pedunculopontine
nucleus [17,18] suggest that impaired function of this
structure, either primary or secondary, may play a key role.
The pedunculopontine nucleus comprises both glutamatergic
and cholinergic neurons. There is to date no convincing
evidence that manipulation of either of these neurotransmitter
systems with medication has any impact on postural control.
The effects of subthalamic nucleus stimulation on gait and
postural stability are much more variable [13,19].

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

Stoessl

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

2.3 Sleep disturbance

Sleep disturbance in PD is probably multifactorial.
Immobility, akathisia and pain due to muscle rigidity are all
presumably symptoms of dopamine deficiency and may
respond to relatively minor modification of standard
anti-Parkinson therapy. It is important to exclude depression
as a basis for disrupted sleep. Although the pathophysiological
basis for depression in PD is poorly understood, it is
generally managed with standard antidepressants. In recent
years, there has been a dramatic increase in the recognition
of REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) as a common
manifestation of PD that may indeed precede the
appearance of motor abnormalities [20]. The usual therapies
are clonazepam or gabapentin but some patients may
be managed by adjusting the timing of their dopaminergic
medication. It appears likely that RBD may be associated
with reduced function in cholinergic projections from
the pedunculopontine nucleus to the thalamus [21]. However,
while some studies have reported benefits in response
to cholinesterase inhibitors [22], others have reported either
no benefit or even exacerbation.
2.4 Cognitive impairment

A majority of PD patients will exhibit deficits in frontalsubcortical executive function, even in the absence of dementia.
Estimates of the frequency of dementia range considerably
but while a figure of 20 – 30% is widely accepted, some
investigators take the view that were they to live long
enough, most PD patients would eventually succumb [23].
While there may undoubtedly be other factors, loss of
cholinergic projections to cortex in PD with dementia is
significant and indeed greater than that seen in Alzheimer’s
disease [24,25]. Cholinesterase inhibitors have been shown
to help with the cognitive deficits and activities of daily
living in dementia associated with PD, and may be
particularly helpful for visual hallucinations [26]. Despite
theoretical concerns of deterioration in motor manifestations,
they have in general proved to be well tolerated apart
from some exacerbation of tremor.
3. Complications of dopaminergic therapy
3.1 Fluctuations in therapeutic response

Although virtually all patients with PD (as opposed to those
with parkinsonism arising from other conditions such as
multiple system atrophy or progressive supranuclear palsy)
will respond to levodopa, a significant proportion will
develop fluctuations in the response to their medication
within 5 years. Several medical approaches can be taken,
including the adjunctive use of direct-acting dopamine
agonists or medications that prevent the breakdown of
levodopa (inhibitors of catechol O-methyltransferase) or
dopamine (inhibitors of monoamine oxidase) [27]. The role
of these approaches is well established and will not be
considered further here. Although not practical for most

patients, it is possible to infuse levodopa continuously [28].
Transdermal administration of a dopamine agonist may also
allow for more continuous delivery of medication and should
theoretically reduce motor fluctuations and dyskinesias [29].
An emerging approach is the modulation of other
neurotransmitters that act downstream of dopamine in the
striatal outflow pathways. A well-developed example of such
an approach is the blockade of adenosine 2A (A2A) receptors.
The A2A receptor is expressed on medium spiny neurons of
the indirect pathway and thereby positioned to modify the
response to dopamine D2 receptors [30]. Blockade of A2A
receptors has only a modest effect on PD symptoms on its
own but as an adjunct, this approach significantly prolongs
the therapeutic response to levodopa and dopamine
agonists [31-34]. Evidence from animal models suggests that
adenosine receptor blockade may also have a neuroprotective
role in PD [35].
Chronic dopaminergic stimulation also modifies the
phosphorylation state of striatal N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors [36]. In experimental models of PD,
blockade of NMDA receptors prevents abnormal serine
phosphorylation of GluR1 receptors and prolongs the
behavioural response to an individual dose of levodopa [37,38].
3.2 Dyskinesias

Dyskinesias are thought to arise from pulsatile stimulation
of dopamine receptors in both the direct and indirect
striatal outflow pathways. Although there is no consistent
change in expression of dopamine receptors (with the
possible exception of D3 receptors in rodent models of
sensitization [39]), there is an increase in the expression
of the transcription factor deltaFosB [40,41] and of
neuropeptides [42-45]. While it is clearly possible to manage
dyskinesia either by reducing the dose of dopaminergic
medication or by administering a dopamine antagonist,
these strategies will generally result in worsening
parkinsonism. In theory, potential approaches might include
the use of a selective dopamine D1 or D3 receptor antagonist
(or the use of a D3 partial agonist) [46-48] but these have
not had demonstrated benefit in clinical trials to date.
Although studies in animal models suggested that
stimulation of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT)1A receptors
might be beneficial in dyskinesias and this appeared to be
the case in open-label studies in humans [49], a large
randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial failed
to confirm this [50]. Indeed, the placebo effect in that
study was considerable [51], highlighting the importance
of controlling for placebo effects in the assessment of
novel therapies. In monkeys with 1-methyl-4-phenyl1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced parkinsonism,
stimulation of 5HT1A + B receptors also appears promising [52].
Drugs that block 5HT2A and/or 5HT2C receptors are
effective in rodent and primate models of levodopa-induced
dyskinesia. However, many of the drugs currently available
for use in humans act at multiple sites, including dopamine

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

427

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Potential therapeutic targets for Parkinson’s disease

receptors. Preliminary reports suggest that combined
stimulation of 5HT1A receptors and blockade of 5HT2
receptors with mirtazapine will suppress dyskinesias in
PD patients [53] but such reports must be viewed with
caution unless substantiated by larger controlled trials.
The experience with sarizotan indicates that the
placebo effect may be quite powerful in suppression
of levodopa-induced dyskinesia [50].
There are close interactions between nigrostriatal
dopamine projections and excitatory corticostriatal projections onto dendritic spines in the striatum. Dyskinesias
are associated with altered expression of NMDA receptors
in the striatum [54], decreased D1/NMDA receptor
complexes [55] and loss of synaptic depotentiation [56].
Although non-selective blockade of NMDA receptors is
a potential approach to the problem (and weak NMDA
antagonists such as amantadine have indeed been
consistently demonstrated to be helpful for dyskinesias in
clinical studies [57]), this strategy is potentially difficult
owing to the widespread expression of the NMDA receptor,
as well as the possibility of interfering with crucial NMDAmediated functions such as learning. The NR2B subtype is
preferentially expressed in the striatum and in experimental
models selective antagonists reduce dyskinesias without
exacerbating parkinsonism [58], even though the ratio of
NR2A to NR2B receptors is increased in association with
dyskinesia [54,59]. Interactions between the NR2B receptor
and membrane-associated guanylate protein kinase
(MAGUK) proteins are altered in dyskinesia [59]. A related
and interesting target for treatment of dyskinesias is the
NMDA receptor-associated scaffolding protein postsynaptic
density protein 95 (PSD-95), possibly via an interaction
with dopamine D1 receptors [60].
Alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic
acid (AMPA) and metabotropic glutamate receptor subtypes
are also an interesting target for levodopa-induced
dyskinesias [61], particularly in view of recent evidence
suggesting that the emergence of dyskinesias is associated
with alterations in synaptic plasticity.
4. Approaches to the modification

of disease progression
This is the most important and potentially most fruitful
area for development but also the area most abounding in
failures. To date, there has been no convincing evidence that
any of the multitude of approaches suggested has had any
effect on the underlying progression of PD.
Although taken together, genetic forms represent only a
minority of all PD, the mechanisms involved may be
relevant to sporadic disease. Of particular importance is an
understanding of the common mechanisms that link the
various monogenic forms of disease. However, as it is already
clear that there are several causes of PD, the idea that a
single therapeutic approach may successfully modify disease
428

may be somewhat naive. On the other hand, it is entirely
possible that several different aetiologies could unleash a
cascade of events resulting in initial and regionally selective
death of dopamine neurons but a relatively limited number
of non-selective mechanisms could explain the progressive
loss of neurons rendered more susceptible.
The first dominantly inherited mutation in PD to be
described was an A53T modification of the gene encoding
α-synuclein [62]. Mutated α-synuclein forms aggregates and
renders dopamine neurons more prone to oxidative stress.
Although α-synuclein mutations represent only a small
proportion even of dominantly inherited PD, sporadic
disease is generally associated with the deposition of
α-synuclein-positive aggregates in dopamine neurons of the
substantia nigra and other brainstem neurons. It is still a
matter of some controversy as to whether aggregated
α-synuclein is toxic or whether the formation of aggregates
is a protective mechanism [63,64]. If the former, a compound
that inhibits protein aggregation, possibly the formation of
protofibrils, would be an interesting target for disease
progression [65]. To date, no such molecule has been
developed and there remain concerns that such an approach
could actually hasten disease by interfering with endogenous
mechanisms to sequester toxic proteins. Recent evidence
suggests that α-synuclein toxicity is mediated by Sirtuin-2,
a member of the histone deacetylase family of proteins and
that sirtuin-2 inhibitors inhibit toxicity both in vitro and
in an in vivo transgenic Drosophila model of PD [66].
The other major dominantly inherited basis for PD
is one of several mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich
repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2, the protein also known as
dardarin, from the Basque for tremor) [67,68]. LRRK2 is an
extremely large protein with multiple domains but it
currently appears that toxicity may be mediated by a gain of
kinase function [69]. Several attempts are currently underway
to develop kinase inhibitors but it remains to be seen
whether these will be selective enough to avoid unwanted
effects. Furthermore, LRRK2 may have numerous other
functions besides its role as a kinase and this approach
may be overly simplistic [70].
The best-studied recessively inherited mutations leading
to PD are those of parkin, phosphatase and tensin homolog
deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN)-induced putative kinase
1 (PINK1) and DJ-1. Parkin is an ubiquitin E3 ligase
important for proteasomal function [71]. Administration of
proteasome inhibitors has been reported to result in selective
loss of nigral dopamine neurons [72] but this finding has not
been readily reproduced [73-76]. The implication is that
promotion of proteasome function or alternatively, the
identification of protein partners not adequately handled by
the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) might be of benefit
in preventing progression of PD. Parkin has functions
besides its role in the UPS. For example, it is responsible for
monoubiquitylation of epidermal growth factor receptor
pathway substrate 15 (Eps15), which in turn inhibits

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Stoessl

the ability of Eps15 to interact with ubiquitinated EGF
receptor (EGFR) and promote EGFR internalization.
Impairment of parkin function will disrupt this relationship
and lead to increased endocytosis and degradation of the
EGF receptor and could thereby potentially contribute
to decreased neuronal survival [77]. Enhancement of the
non-proteasomal ubiquitinating functions of parkin could
potentially be of benefit.
In addition to the UPS, misfolded or aggregated proteins
can be handled by lysosome-mediated autophagy and by
molecular chaperones. There is a significant body of evidence
to suggest that overexpression of molecular chaperones such
as heat-shock proteins [78,79] or treatments that upregulate
chaperone expression [80] may be beneficial in models
of PD. This potential approach has been the topic of
a number of recent reviews [81-84].
Although its precise function is unknown, PINK1 resides
in the mitochondrial inter-membrane space and recent
evidence suggests that it too may protect against oxidative
stress by phosphorylation of the mitochondrial chaperone
TNF receptor-associate protein 1 (TRAP1) [85]. In
Drosophila, mutation of PINK1 results in a phenotype
virtually identical to that seen with mutation of parkin.
Both mutants can be rescued by expression of wild type
parkin, while expression of wild type PINK1 will not rescue
parkin mutants, suggesting that parkin (which is located in
the cytosol) is acting downstream of PINK1 [86,87] and that
therapies based on restoration or overexpression of parkin
function may be of therapeutic benefit. DJ-1 is also a
molecular chaperone that can inhibit the aggregation of
α-synuclein in a redox-dependent fashion [88,89]. These
properties of PINK1 and DJ-1 lend further support to
the potential for developing therapies based on enhanced
chaperone function.
Regardless of the upstream mechanism, nigral dopamine
neurons are thought to undergo apoptotic death. Inhibitors
of apoptosis therefore remain a therapeutic target of interest
for PD as well as for other neurodegenerative disorders. To
date, there has been no evidence that such agents confer an
increased risk of malignancy. However, there has also been
no evidence for therapeutic benefit. Initial enthuasiasm for
the propargylamine monoamine oxidase (MAO)-B inhibitor
selegiline has largely dissipated, as it became apparent that
the majority of the benefits could be attributed to symptom
relief rather than disease modification [90]. In a study of the
newer propargylamine rasagiline, the group assigned to
placebo followed by open-label active drug did not derive
the same benefit as the group treated with rasagiline from
study outset [91]. This difference in the delayed-start group
could reflect a modest effect of medication on disease
progression but must be verified by a prospective, fully
blinded study, currently underway. For both selegiline and
rasagiline, any disease-modifying effects are presumed to be
related to their capacity to interfere with GAPDH-mediated
apoptosis rather than inhibition of MAO-B. Another

propargylamine devoid of MAO inhibitory properties
recently failed to demonstrate any effect on disease
progression in PD, despite ample benefits in animal
models [92]. There was similarly no evidence of benefit
(or harm) associated with the mixed lineage kinase
inhibitor CEP 1347 [93].
Other mechanisms that might contribute to neuronal loss
and progression in PD include mitochondrial failure,
oxidative stress, excitotoxicity and inflammation. Attempts
to boost mitochondrial function and limit oxidative stress
have included the use of Coenzyme Q10. In the only
properly controlled trial, the largest dose (1200 mg daily) of
Coenzyme Q10 resulted in very modest reduction of the
rate of clinical worsening in the first few months in patients
who did not yet require symptomatic therapy, but no
benefit was seen at lower doses, nor was there any significant delay in the requirement for levodopa [94]. A futility
analysis conducted by the NET-PD group suggested that
creatine and minocycline are worthy of further testing
as neuroprotectants in PD, although the benefit seen in
that study was marginal [95].
One very interesting and relatively straightforward
approach has received recent attention in animal models.
Dopamine neurons have an intrinsic pacemaker function
that is determined by expression of the Cav1.3 channel,
which is only expressed later in development. Blockade of
Cav1.3 channels using isradipine results in temporary loss of
pacemaker activity but within less than 2 h, this returns,
now mediated by sodium channels. Isradipine was effective
in reducing loss of dopamine neurons in MPTP and
rotenone models in rodents but has not yet been tested
in primate models or in less acute models of disease [96].
Attempts to interfere with excitotoxic nigral cell death
have included the use of inhibitors of sodium-dependent
glutamate release such as riluzole, which, however. failed to
modify progression of early disease [97]. A number of AMPA
receptor antagonists are currently in clinical trials as neuroprotectants. As lesions of the STN protect against the effects
of 6-hydroxydopamine toxicity [98], there was some hope
that deep brain stimulation of the STN might delay disease
progression in human Parkinson’s disease in addition to the
beneficial effects on symptoms but the limited evidence
available to date does not support this [99]. Gene therapy
to modify the phenotype of the STN is discussed below.
There is ample evidence for abnormal inflammation
in PD, based on animal models, as well as in vivo imaging
and postmortem histological studies in humans [100]. There
have been no prospective studies of anti-inflammatory
therapies as neuroprotectants in PD. However, numerous
case-control studies have demonstrated a lower risk of PD
in people taking anti-inflammatory agents [101,102].
Neurotrophic factors held great hope for the prevention
of disease progression, despite numerous technical
challenges, not the least of which is adequate delivery of the
molecule to the target site (striatum or substantia nigra).

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

429

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Potential therapeutic targets for Parkinson’s disease

The agent that has until recently attracted the greatest
attention was glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF). Initial studies of intracerebroventricular administration demonstrated no benefit and significant side
effects [103]. However, based on studies in non-human
primate models of MPTP toxicity, the effects of direct intraputaminal administration have been investigated.
Unfortunately, initial promising results from open-label
studies [104] were not substantiated in a double-blind placebocontrolled trial [105]. The related agent neurturin is currently
being administered using recombinant adeno-associated virus
gene therapy. Open-label studies have demonstrated
considerable benefit [106] and a double-blind sham-surgerycontrolled study is currently underway. Another approach
to neurotrophic factor administration is to give a small
molecule that crosses the blood–brain barrier and stimulates
the production of endogenous neurotrophic factors.
SR 57667B (paliroden) is such a molecule that was
recently tested in a double-blind trial in early Parkinson’s
disease but there was no clinical or imaging evidence
of disease modification [107].
5. Potential gene therapy targets for PD

Gene therapy for PD has received considerable attention in
the last several months. As is the case for medical therapies,
gene therapy may target either the symptoms of PD or
attempt to modify disease progression. Treatment of
symptoms has largely been based on the use of viral vectors
to introduce either tyrosine hydroxylase [108] or aromatic
amino acid decarboxylase [109], the latter is already in
clinical trials. Attempts to interfere with disease progression
have included viral delivery of GDNF or the related
molecule neurturin [110]. Neurturin has demonstrated some
promise in open-label studies but the results of an ongoing
double-blind sham-surgery-controlled trial are required.
GDNF was not beneficial in a double-blind study but some
investigators feel the design was flawed. Gene therapy
can also be used to modify the effects of aberrant protein
aggregation. Thus, viral delivery of parkin [111,112] has been
shown to reduce the toxicity of α-synuclein overexpression
and it has been suggested that lentiviral delivery of
beta-synuclein may confer similar benefit [113].
An interesting approach that primarily addresses
symptoms but may also have an impact on disease progression
has recently been reported. Kaplitt and colleagues have used
rAAV2 to deliver glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) to the
subthalamic nucleus, thereby converting it from a primarily
excitatory (glutamatergic) structure to an inhibitory
(GABAergic) one. In an open-label study conducted in
12 patients, this manipulation of STN phenotype resulted
in symptom improvement [114]. This was associated with
reversal of Parkinson-associated metabolic abnormalities on
[18F]2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography
(PET) [115]. There were no significant treatment-related
430

adverse events. However, apart from the lack of a placebo
control, there were a number of other observations that suggest
that caution is indicated before embracing this approach.
Although the viral vector was introduced unilaterally, bilateral
improvement was evident. Furthermore, unlike other surgical
manipulations of STN function, improvement was seen
in function while patients were on medication – usually,
significant improvement is restricted to the off-medication
state and surgical therapies do not further augment the benefit
of optimal medication. There was no apparent effect of viral
dose. The long-term effects of converting a structure that is
usually excitatory into one that has an inhibitory function
are not fully appreciated. Taking all these caveats into
consideration, there is some preclinical evidence to suggest
that the effects of STN rAAV-GAD therapy may be neuroprotective in a rodent model of PD [116]. This has not yet
been demonstrated in human or non-human primate models
and as noted above, there is to date no evidence to suggest
that STN DBS is neuroprotective in human PD.
It should be noted that even if these provocative therapies
ultimately prove to be beneficial, they are focused on
either dopamine deficiency itself, or associated downstream
changes in circuitry subserving motor functions of the
basal ganglia. Thus, none of these approaches (with the
possible exception of parkin overexpression) is likely to have
an impact on degeneration of non-dopaminergic neuronal
populations or its sequelae.
6. Other needs for therapeutic
target development

Although the imperfections and deficiencies of dopaminergic
medications are manifold, one should not lose sight of the
fact that levodopa remains the single most effective and well
tolerated medication for treating the cardinal manifestations
of Parkinson’s disease. Attempts to develop therapies that
address the non-motor complications of advanced PD will
depend to a large degree on a better understanding of the
pathophysiology underlying these complications. However,
the development of disease-modifying therapies has been
stymied by two other significant deficiencies. One is the lack
of well-validated biomarkers. Although functional imaging
using either PET or single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) can provide valuable information on
the level of striatal dopamine innervation, the expression of
several of the markers used may be subject to regulation by
the treatments that are being used, or by processes that serve
to compensate for the disease [117]. Regardless of the reason,
the correlations between imaging and clinical outcome
measures in numerous trials of putative disease modifying
therapies has been very poor. Until a more reliable
biomarker can be developed, it will be very difficult to assess
the effects of novel therapies on disease progression [118,119].
The second major barrier to the development of novel therapies
has been the lack of animal models that successfully predict

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Stoessl

the response to disease modification. Thus, most models
involve the acute or subacute toxin-induced death of
dopamine neurons and are primarily useful for predicting
the effects of symptomatic therapies. The questionable
relevance of such models to the insidiously progressive nature
of PD and their failure to account for non-dopaminergic
lesions in advanced PD is highlighted by the consistent
failure to translate into clinical benefit neuroprotective
strategies that were highly effective in these models. The
future successful development of neuroprotective therapies
will be heavily dependent upon the use of better validated
animal models of PD. Early promising indications for
the use of systemic proteasome inhibitors have not been
replicated in many labs and currently the most promising
approach is the use of animals in which expression of key
genes such as α-synuclein has been modified.
7. Expert opinion

The major challenges for the treatment of PD remain
modification of the underlying disease and its progression,
as well as the management of advanced disease, particularly
complications reflecting dysfunction in non-dopaminergic
systems. At this point, numerous approaches to the management of dopaminergic dysfunction have been developed
and further advances are likely to be incremental, with the
possible exception of therapies that selectively target specific
dopamine receptor subtypes, such as antagonists or partial
agonists for the dopamine D3 receptor, for the management
of dyskinesias.
Non-dopaminergic mechanisms in PD are still poorly
understood. Blockade of striatal adenosine receptors is
of demonstrated benefit in motor response fluctuations.
Manipulation of striatal 5HT receptors may be useful
for levodopa-induced dyskinesias but most available agents,
particularly receptor antagonists, are somewhat non-specific
and target dopamine receptors as well. Furthermore, 5HT
receptors are widely distributed and treatment may result in
numerous unwanted effects. This is perhaps even more the
case for therapies based on modification of excitatory amino
acid transmission, although the preferential distribution
of specific NMDA receptor subtypes, coupled with the
development of subtype-specific antagonists, may circumvent
this problem. In recent years, there has been a resurgence of
interest in cholinergic mechanisms in PD. The classical view
of an altered balance between dopaminergic and cholinergic
function in the striatum is overly simplistic and not therapeutically useful in view of the unacceptable cognitive side
effects associated with non-selective blockade of muscarinic
receptors. In the future, more selective agents may be of
benefit. While stimulation of nicotinic receptors may result
in dopamine release, its role in PD is unclear. A recent
report suggests potential benefit for dyskinesias in MPTPtreated monkeys [120], but this finding must be substantiated.
Cholinergic stimulation has an increasingly accepted role in

the management of cognitive and behavioural disturbances
associated with PD but the role in other complications such
as sleep disturbance and postural instability that may arise in
part from degeneration of brainstem cholinergic neurons is
unclear. Although there is ample evidence for altered neuropeptide transmission in PD, and in association with levodopa
therapy, this has not yet led to clear therapeutic strategies.
Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN
DBS) is now widely accepted as established therapy for
advanced PD. Although there are individual reports of improvement in complications that are only partially responsive
to medication, it is generally felt that STN DBS can
only result in the best function seen when patients are on
medication [13]. However, as reduction in medication
dose may be possible, some dose-related complications of
medication use, including dyskinesias and psychosis, may
improve. When the internal segment of the globus pallidus
is stimulated, the dose of medication is less likely to
be reduced but there may be a substantial reduction in
dyskinesias. The role of pedunculopontine stimulation
for postural and gait impairment is not yet established.
Cognitive and behavioural side effects of DBS, including
disorders of impulse control [121], may be considerable, the
surgery is invasive, batteries and hardware may fail and
the stimulator adjustments require expertise. This form of
therapy is therefore likely to remain an adjunct to be used
in the management of carefully selected patients rather
than a replacement for optimized medication, even though
short-term outcome is better in patients who undergo
surgery [122]. Theoretical considerations that STN DBS
might delay disease progression by interfering with
excitatory outputs from this nucleus have not been
supported by observations to date [99].
Disease modification is ultimately the most important
therapeutic goal but has proved to be an enormous
challenge. Despite theoretical evidence that oxidative stress,
excitatory amino acid transmission and apoptosis may all
play a role in Parkinson’s, therapies based on these approaches
have not to date proved useful. Anti-inflammatory
treatments would also be of potential utility but have
not been adequately tested. To date, neurotrophic therapies
have demonstrated only limited, if any, benefit but difficulty
delivering drug to the target site may play a greater
role here.
Gene therapies for Parkinson’s may prove useful in the
future but this will depend upon the ability to express an
appropriate molecule in a regionally selective fashion. It
seems unlikely that gene therapy based on correction of
dopamine deficiency will confer much advantage over
available pharmaceutical agents. The role of STN GAD
therapy and of viral delivery of genes encoding neurotrophic
factors is still not clear. Even if these treatments prove helpful,
they are unlikely to address the distressing non-motor,
non-dopaminergic complications of advanced disease. Gene
therapy to interfere with aberrant protein aggregation may

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

431

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

Potential therapeutic targets for Parkinson’s disease

indeed be of interest but whether this will indeed have an
impact on disease progression is far from certain.
One of the greatest sources of frustration has been the
consistent failure of therapies that were promising in animal
models to translate into meaningful modification of disease
in humans. In some cases, this may reflect difficulties with
drug delivery or toxicity arising from stimulation of
unintended target sites. These are essentially technical
hurdles that can theoretically be solved. However, a much
bigger question is the relevance of the preclinical models to
Parkinson’s in humans. Thus, significant advances in this
domain will require careful study of the condition in humans
to try and gain further insights into etiopathogenetic
mechanisms, as well as the development of animal models
that more faithfully mimic the situation in human disease.
Until this is done, we are likely to witness many more disappointments in the future. Once promising strategies are
identified, their efficacy must of course be demonstrated in
humans and this will require the development of better and
more efficient trial designs with careful avoidance of potential
confounding factors, as well as validated biomarkers that
permit independent, objective measures of outcome. The

1.

2.

3.

•

Marsden CD, Parkes JD. “On-off ”
effects in patients with Parkinson’s disease
on chronic levodopa therapy. Lancet
1976;1:292-6
Rascol O, Brooks DJ, Korczyn AD,
et al. 056 Study Group. A five-year study
of the incidence of dyskinesia in patients
with early Parkinson’s disease who were
treated with ropinirole or levodopa.
N Engl J Med 2000;342:1484-91
Voon V, Fox SH. Medication-related
impulse control and repetitive behaviors
in Parkinson disease. Arch Neurol
2007;64:1089-96
This is an excellent review of
impulse-control disorders related to
dopaminergic medication for PD.

A controlled, randomized, delayed-start
study of rasagiline in early Parkinson
disease. Arch Neurol 2004;61:561-6

8.

Parkinson Study Group. Effect of deprenyl
on the progression of disability in early
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med
1989;321:1364-71

14.

Olanow CW, Hauser RA, Gauger L,
et al. The effect of deprenyl and levodopa
on the progression of Parkinson’s disease.
Ann Neurol 1995;38:771-7

Pinto S, Thobois S, Costes N, et al.
Subthalamic nucleus stimulation and
dysarthria in Parkinson’s disease: a PET
study. Brain 2004;127:602-15

15.

Ramig LO, Fox C, Sapir S. Parkinson’s
disease: speech and voice disorders and
their treatment with the Lee Silverman
Voice Treatment. Semin Speech Lang
2004;25:169-80

16.

Sapir S, Spielman JL, Ramig LO,
et al. Effects of intensive voice treatment
(the Lee Silverman Voice Treatment
[LSVT]) on vowel articulation in dysarthric
individuals with idiopathic Parkinson
disease: acoustic and perceptual findings.
J Speech Lang Hear Res 2007;50:899-912

17.

Plaha P, Gill SS. Bilateral deep brain
stimulation of the pedunculopontine
nucleus for Parkinson’s disease.
Neuroreport 2005;16:1883-7

18.

Stefani A, Lozano AM, Peppe A, et al.
Bilateral deep brain stimulation of the
pedunculopontine and subthalamic nuclei

9.

10.

De Letter M, Santens P, Estercam I,
et al. Levodopa-induced modifications
of prosody and comprehensibility
in advanced Parkinson’s disease as
perceived by professional listeners.
Clin Linguist Phon 2007;21:783-91

Marek K, Seibyl J, Shoulson I, et al.
Dopamine transporter brain imaging
to assess the effects of pramipexole vs
levodopa on Parkinson disease progression.
JAMA 2002;287:1653-61

12.

Pinto S, Gentil M, Krack P, et al.
Changes induced by levodopa and
subthalamic nucleus stimulation on
parkinsonian speech. Mov Disord
2005;20:1507-15

Whone AL, Watts RL, Stoessl AJ, et al.
Slower progression of Parkinson’s disease

13.

5.

•

Parkinson’s disease: a multicentre
study with 4 years follow-up. Brain
2005;128:2240-9
This paper reports the long-term effects
of deep brain stimulation of either the
internal globus pallidus or the subthalamic
nucleus for advanced PD and provides
a balanced presentation of benefits and
side effects.

7.

De Letter M, Santens P, De Bodt M, et al.
The effect of levodopa on respiration and
word intelligibility in people with advanced
Parkinson’s disease. Clin Neurol Neurosurg
2007;109:495-500

Fahn S, Oakes D, Shoulson I, et al.
Levodopa and the progression of
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med
2004;351:2498-508

432

The author’s work is supported by a Team Grant in
Parkinson’s from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
a Research Unit award from the Michael Smith Foundation
for Health Research, a Centre Grant from the Pacific
Alzheimer Research Foundation, a Centre of Excellence
award from the National Parkinson Foundation and by the
Canada Research Chairs program. The author has received
honoraria for speaking and/or participated in advisory boards
within the past 5 years from Boehringer, Ceregene, Kyowa,
Prestwick, Solvay and Teva Neuroscience and has participated
in clinical trials sponsored by Amgen, Aventis, Boehringer,
Ceregene, Glaxo SmithKline, Kyowa and Sanofi. He has
no financial interests in the products of these companies or
any of the other therapeutic products discussed.

11.

4.

6.

Declaration of interest

with ropinirole versus levodopa:
the REAL-PET study. Ann Neurol
2003;54:93-101

Bibliography
Papers of special note have been highlighted
as either of interest (•) or of considerable
interest (••) to readers.

importance of the placebo effect in PD should not be
forgotten [123-130]. It is therefore crucial that all new therapies
be subjected to adequately controlled trials in early stages, as
many of the benefits reported from preliminary studies have
disappeared when placebo controls were used.

Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Obeso JA, Lang AE,
et al. Bilateral deep brain stimulation in

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

Stoessl

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

•

in severe Parkinson’s disease. Brain
2007;130:1596-607
This paper reports the effects of
pedunculopontine or subthalamic
nucleus stimulation, either separately
or in combination, and provides
evidence of improvement in postural
and gait abnormalities with
pedunculopontine stimulation.

•

fluctuations (LARGO, Lasting effect
in Adjunct therapy with Rasagiline
Given Once daily, study): a randomised,
double-blind, parallel-group trial.
Lancet 2005;365:947-54
This paper provided evidence of benefit
from the MAO-B inhibitor rasagiline in
PD patients with motor fluctuations.
Unlike most clinical trials in PD, the
active drug was compared against an agent
from another class (the catechol
O-methyltransferase inhibitor
entacapone). Both agents provided
comparable benefit.

37.

Chase TN. Striatal plasticity and
extrapyramidal motor dysfunction.
Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2004;10:305-13

38.

Wessell RH, Ahmed SM, Menniti FS,
et al. NR2B selective NMDA receptor
antagonist CP-101,606 prevents
levodopa-induced motor response
alterations in hemi-parkinsonian rats.
Neuropharmacology 2004;47:184-94

39.

•

Bordet R, Ridray S, Carboni S, et al.
Induction of dopamine D3 receptor
expression as a mechanism of behavioral
sensitization to levodopa. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1997;94:3363-7
This was the first paper to suggest a
functional role for the D3 receptor
with respect to complications of
treatment in PD.

19.

Hamani C, Richter E, Schwalb JM,
Lozano AM. Bilateral subthalamic nucleus
stimulation for Parkinson’s disease:
a systematic review of the clinical literature.
Neurosurgery 2005;56:1313-21

20.

Boeve BF, Silber MH, Saper CB,
et al. Pathophysiology of REM sleep
behaviour disorder and relevance to
neurodegenerative disease. Brain 2007
This paper provides an excellent review
of the pathophysiology of REM sleep
behaviour disorder, commonly seen either
prior to or associated with PD.

28.

Nyholm D. Enteral levodopa/carbidopa
gel infusion for the treatment of motor
fluctuations and dyskinesias in advanced
Parkinson’s disease. Expert Rev Neurother
2006;6:1403-11

29.

Morgan JC, Sethi KD. Rotigotine for
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Expert Rev Neurother 2006;6:1275-82

21.

Gilman S, Koeppe RA, Chervin RD,
et al. REM sleep behavior disorder is
related to striatal monoaminergic deficit
in MSA. Neurology 2003;61:29-34

30.

Schwarzschild MA, Agnati L, Fuxe K, et al.
Targeting adenosine A2A receptors in
Parkinson’s disease. Trends Neurosci
2006;29:647-54

22.

Ringman JM, Simmons JH. Treatment of
REM sleep behavior disorder with
donepezil: a report of three cases.
Neurology 2000;55:870-1

31.

Bara-Jimenez W, Sherzai A, Dimitrova T,
et al. Adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonist
treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology
2003;61:293-6

23.

Aarsland D, Andersen K, Larsen JP,
et al. Prevalence and characteristics of
dementia in Parkinson disease: an 8-year
prospective study. Arch Neurol
2003;60:387-92

32.

Hauser RA, Hubble JP, Truong DD.
Randomized trial of the adenosine A(2A)
receptor antagonist is tradefylline in
advanced PD. Neurology 2003;61:297-303

•

24.

Perry EK, Haroutunian V, Davis KL,
et al. Neocortical cholinergic activities
differentiate Lewy body dementia from
classical Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroreport
1994;5:747-9

25.

Bohnen NI, Kaufer DI, Ivanco LS, et al.
Cortical cholinergic function is more
severely affected in parkinsonian dementia
than in Alzheimer disease: an in vivo
positron emission tomographic study.
Arch Neurol 2003;60:1745-8

26.

•

27.

Emre M, Aarsland D, Albanese A, et al.
Rivastigmine for dementia associated
with Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med
2004;351:2509-18
This was the first major, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial to provide
evidence for a role of cholinesterase
inhibitors in dementia associated with PD.
Rascol O, Brooks DJ, Melamed E, et al.
Rasagiline as an adjunct to levodopa in
patients with Parkinson’s disease and motor

33.

Kanda T, Jackson MJ, Smith LA, et al.
Combined use of the adenosine A(2A)
antagonist KW-6002 with L-DOPA or
with selective D1 or D2 dopamine agonists
increases antiparkinsonian activity but
not dyskinesia in MPTP-treated monkeys.
Exp Neurol 2000;162:321-7

34.

Kanda T, Jackson MJ, Smith LA, et al.
Adenosine A2A antagonist: a novel
antiparkinsonian agent that does not
provoke dyskinesia in parkinsonian
monkeys. Ann Neurol 1998;43:507-13
Chen JF, Xu K, Petzer JP, et al.
Neuroprotection by caffeine and A(2A)
adenosine receptor inactivation in
a model of Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci
2001;21:RC143

35.

36.

Oh JD, Russell DS, Vaughan CL,
Chase TN. Enhanced tyrosine
phosphorylation of striatal NMDA
receptor subunits: effect of dopaminergic
denervation and L-DOPA administration.
Brain Res 1998;813:150-9

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

40.

Andersson M, Hilbertson A, Cenci MA.
Striatal fosB expression is causally linked
with l-DOPA-induced abnormal
involuntary movements and the associated
upregulation of striatal prodynorphin
mRNA in a rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. Neurobiol Dis 1999;6:461-74

41.

Doucet J-P, Nakabeppu Y, Bedard PJ,
et al. Chronic alterations in dopaminergic
neurotransmission produce a persistent
elevation of FosB-like protein(s) in both
the rodent and primate striatum.
Eur J Neurosci 1997;8:365-81
This paper demonstrated a selective
upregulation of delta FosB associated
with drug-induced movement disorders.

•

42.

Engber TM, Susel Z, Kuo S, et al.
Levodopa replacement therapy alters
enzyme activities in striatum and
neuropeptide content in striatal output
regions of 6-hydroxydopamine lesioned
rats. Brain Res 1991;552:113-8

43.

Calon F, Grondin R, Morissette M, et al.
Molecular basis of levodopa-induced
dyskinesias. Ann Neurol 2000;47:S70-8

44.

Calon F, Birdi S, Rajput AH, et al.
Increase of preproenkephalin mRNA levels
in the putamen of Parkinson disease
patients with levodopa-induced dyskinesia.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2002;61:186-96

45.

Cenci MA, Lee CS, Bjorklund A.
L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia in the rat is
associated with striatal overexpression
of prodynorphin- and glutamic acid
decarboxylase mRNA. Eur J Neurosci
1998;10:2694-706

46.

Van Kampen JM, Stoessl AJ. Effects of
oligonucleotide antisense to dopamine
D1A receptor mRNA in a rodent model

433

Potential therapeutic targets for Parkinson’s disease

associated with levodopa-induced
dyskinesias and provided the most direct
evidence for altered synaptic plasticity
as a basis for this complication of therapy.

of levodopa-induced dyskinesia.
Neuroscience 2000;98:61-7
47.

48.

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

••

434

Van Kampen JM, Stoessl AJ. Effects of
oligonucleotide antisense to dopamine
D(3) receptor mRNA in a rodent model
of behavioural sensitization to levodopa.
Neuroscience 2003;116:307-14
Bezard E, Ferry S, Mach U, et al.
Attenuation of levodopa-induced
dyskinesia by normalizing dopamine D3
receptor function. Nat Med 2003;9:762-7
Olanow CW, Damier P, Goetz CG,
et al. Multicenter, open-label, trial of
sarizotan in Parkinson disease patients
with levodopa-induced dyskinesias (the
SPLENDID Study). Clin Neuropharmacol
2004;27:58-62
Goetz CG, Damier P, Hicking C, et al.
Sarizotan as a treatment for dyskinesias in
Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind
placebo-controlled trial. Mov Disord
2007;22:179-86
Goetz CG, Laska E, Hicking C,
et al. Placebo influences on dyskinesia
in Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord 2008:
published online 3 January 2008,
doi:10.1002/mds.21897
Iravani MM, Jackson MJ,
Kuoppamaki M, et al.
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(ecstasy) inhibits dyskinesia expression
and normalizes motor activity
in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine-treated primates.
J Neurosci 2003;23:9107-15
Meco G, Fabrizio E, Di Rezze S,
et al. Mirtazapine in L-dopa-induced
dyskinesias. Clin Neuropharmacol
2003;26:179-81
Hallett PJ, Dunah AW, Ravenscroft P, et al.
Alterations of striatal NMDA receptor
subunits associated with the development
of dyskinesia in the MPTP-lesioned
primate model of Parkinson’s disease.
Neuropharmacology 2005;48:503-16
Fiorentini C, Rizzetti MC, Busi C,
et al. Loss of synaptic D1
dopamine/N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate
receptor complexes in L-DOPA-induced
dyskinesia in the rat. Mol Pharmacol
2006;69:805-12
Picconi B, Centonze D, Hakansson K,
et al. Loss of bidirectional striatal synaptic
plasticity in L-DOPA-induced dyskinesia.
Nat Neurosci 2003;6:501-6
This paper presents results that
demonstrated loss of depotentiation

57.

Metman LV, Del Dotto P, LePoole K,
et al. Amantadine for levodopa-induced
dyskinesias: a 1-year follow-up study.
Arch Neurol 1999;56:1383-6

58.

Morissette M, Dridi M, Calon F, et al.
Prevention of levodopa-induced
dyskinesias by a selective NR1A/2B
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist
in parkinsonian monkeys: implication
of preproenkephalin. Mov Disord
2006;21:9-17

59.

Gardoni F, Picconi B, Ghiglieri V, et al.
A critical interaction between NR2B and
MAGUK in L-DOPA induced dyskinesia.
J Neurosci 2006;26:2914-22

60.

Zhang J, Vinuela A, Neely MH, et al.
Inhibition of the dopamine D1 receptor
signaling by PSD-95. J Biol Chem
2007;282:15778-89

61.

Mela F, Marti M, Dekundy A,
et al. Antagonism of metabotropic
glutamate receptor type 5 attenuates
l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia and its
molecular and neurochemical correlates
in a rat model of Parkinson’s disease.
J Neurochem 2007;101:483-97

62.

••

Polymeropoulos MH, Lavedan C, Leroy E,
et al. Mutation in the α-synuclein gene
identified in families with Parkinson’s
disease. Science 1997;276:2045-7
This paper describes the first mutation
to be associated with PD.

63.

Periquet M, Fulga T, Myllykangas L,
et al. Aggregated α-synuclein mediates
dopaminergic neurotoxicity in vivo.
J Neurosci 2007;27:3338-46

64.

Olanow CW, Perl DP, DeMartino GN,
McNaught KS. Lewy-body formation is
an aggresome-related process: a hypothesis.
Lancet Neurol 2004;3:496-503

65.

El Agnaf OM, Paleologou KE, Greer B,
et al. A strategy for designing inhibitors
of α-synuclein aggregation and toxicity
as a novel treatment for Parkinson’s disease
and related disorders. FASEB J
2004;18:1315-7

66.

Outeiro TF, Kontopoulos E, Altmann SM,
et al. Sirtuin 2 inhibitors rescue
α-synuclein-mediated toxicity in
models of Parkinson’s disease. Science
2007;317:516-9

67.

Zimprich A, Biskup S, Leitner P,
et al. Mutations in LRRK2 cause
Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

•

68.

•

autosomal-dominant parkinsonism
with pleomorphic pathology. Neuron
2004;44:601-7
This paper and the paper following
appeared concurrently and describe
mutations in leucine rich repeat kinase-2,
now recognized as the commonest
form of dominantly inherited PD and
also responsible for some cases of
sporadic disease.
Paisan-Ruiz C, Jain S, Evans EW, et al.
Cloning of the gene containing mutations
that cause PARK8-linked Parkinson’s
disease. Neuron 2004;44:595-600
This paper and the paper above appeared
concurrently and describe mutations in
leucine rich repeat kinase-2, now recognized
as the commonest form of dominantly
inherited PD and also responsible for
some cases of sporadic disease.

69.

Smith WW, Pei Z, Jiang H, et al. Kinase
activity of mutant LRRK2 mediates
neuronal toxicity. Nat Neurosci
2006;9:1231-3

70.

Farrer MJ. Lrrk2 in the limelight!
Neurology 2007;69:1732-3

71.

Shimura H, Hattori N, Kubo SI,
et al. Familial Parkinson disease gene
product, parkin, is a ubiquitin-protein
ligase. Nat Genet 2000;25:302-5
This paper described a functional role
for parkin as a ubiquitin E3 ligase. It
highlighted the potential importance of
impaired ubiquitin-proteasome function
as a basis for PD and other
neurodegenerative disorders.

••

72.

McNaught KS, Perl DP, Brownell AL,
Olanow CW. Systemic exposure to
proteasome inhibitors causes a progressive
model of Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol
2004;56:149-62

73.

Bove J, Zhou C, Jackson-Lewis V, et al.
Proteasome inhibition and Parkinson’s
disease modeling. Ann Neurol
2006;60:260-4

74.

Kordower JH, Kanaan NM, Chu Y,
et al. Failure of proteasome inhibitor
administration to provide a model of
Parkinson’s disease in rats and monkeys.
Ann Neurol 2006;60:264-8

75.

Manning-Bog AB, Reaney SH, Chou VP,
et al. Lack of nigrostriatal pathology in
a rat model of proteasome inhibition.
Ann Neurol 2006;60:256-60

76.

Mathur BN, Neely MD,
Dyllick-Brenzinger M, et al. Systemic
administration of a proteasome inhibitor

Stoessl

does not cause nigrostriatal dopamine
degeneration. Brain Res 2007;1168:83-9
77.

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

•

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

Fallon L, Belanger CM, Corera AT, et al.
A regulated interaction with the
UIM protein Eps15 implicates parkin
in EGF receptor trafficking and
PI(3)K-Akt signalling. Nat Cell Biol
2006;8:834-42
This paper describes another potential
mechanism for neurodegeneration due
to parkin mutation. In addition to the
importance of polyubiquitination for
delivery of proteins to the proteasome,
monoubiquitination is important for
trafficking of cell surface receptors.
Dedmon MM, Christodoulou J,
Wilson MR, Dobson CM. Heat shock
protein 70 inhibits α-synuclein fibril
formation via preferential binding to
prefibrillar species. J Biol Chem
2005;280:14733-40

88.

Shendelman S, Jonason A, Martinat C,
et al. DJ-1 is a redox-dependent molecular
chaperone that inhibits α-synuclein
aggregate formation. PLoS Biol
2004;2:e362. Published online 5 October
2004, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020362

97.

Rascol O, Olanow W, Brooks D,
et al. Effect of riluzole on Parkinson’s
disease progression: a double-blind
placebo-controlled study [abstract].
Neurology 2003;60:A288

98.

Piallat B, Benazzouz A, Benabid AL.
Subthalamic nucleus lesion in rats
prevents dopaminergic nigral neuron
degeneration after striatal 6-OHDA
injection: behavioural and
immunohistochemical studies.
Eur J Neurosci 1996;8:1408-14

99.

Nagel F, Falkenburger BH, Tonges L,
et al. Tat-Hsp70 protects dopaminergic
neurons in midbrain cultures and in the
substantia nigra in models of Parkinson’s
disease. J Neurochem 2008

Zhou W, Zhu M, Wilson MA, et al.
The oxidation state of DJ-1 regulates
its chaperone activity toward α-synuclein.
J Mol Biol 2006;356:1036-48

90.

Auluck PK, Meulener MC, Bonini NM.
Mechanisms of suppression of α-synuclein
neurotoxicity by geldanamycin in
Drosophila. J Biol Chem 2005;280:2873-8

Parkinson Study Group. Effects of
tocopherol and deprenyl on the progression
of disability in early Parkinson’s disease.
N Engl J Med 1993;328:176-83

100. McGeer PL, McGeer EG. Inflammation
and neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s
disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord
2004;10(Suppl 1):S3-7

91.

Muchowski PJ, Wacker JL. Modulation
of neurodegeneration by molecular
chaperones. Nat Rev Neurosci
2005;6:11-22

Parkinson Study Group. A controlled
trial of rasagiline in early Parkinson disease:
the TEMPO Study. Arch Neurol
2002;59:1937-43

101. Chen H, Zhang SM, Hernan MA,
et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs and the risk of Parkinson disease.
Arch Neurol 2003;60:1059-64

92.

Olanow CW, Schapira AH, LeWitt PA,
et al. TCH346 as a neuroprotective drug
in Parkinson’s disease: a double-blind,
randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Neurol
2006;5:1013-20

102. Wahner AD, Bronstein JM, Bordelon YM,
Ritz B. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs may protect against Parkinson
disease. Neurology 2007;69:1836-42

93.

Parkinson Study Group PRECEPT
Investigators. Mixed lineage kinase
inhibitor CEP-1347 fails to delay disability
in early Parkinson disease. Neurology
2007;69:1480-90

Luo GR, Chen S, Le WD. Are heat shock
proteins therapeutic target for Parkinson’s
disease? Int J Biol Sci 2007;3:20-6

84.

Rochet JC. Novel therapeutic strategies
for the treatment of protein-misfolding
diseases. Expert Rev Mol Med 2007;9:1-34

•

•

Park J, Lee SB, Lee S, et al. Mitochondrial
dysfunction in Drosophila PINK1 mutants
is complemented by parkin. Nature
2006;441:1157-61
This paper and the preceding one
described phenotypic similarities
between PINK1 and parkin mutations
in Drosophila and rescue by parkin
overexpression of dysfunction in
PINK1 mutants.

89.

Chaudhuri TK, Paul S. Protein-misfolding
diseases and chaperone-based therapeutic
approaches. FEBS J 2006;273:1331-49

86.

87.

channel changes the phenotype of the
channel underlying pacemaker function
in dopamine neurons and results
in protection in experimental models
of Parkinson’s.

Hilker R, Portman AT, Voges J, et al.
Disease progression continues in patients
with advanced Parkinson’s disease and
effective subthalamic nucleus stimulation.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
2005;76:1217-21

83.

85.

in Drosophila and rescue by parkin
overexpression of dysfunction in
PINK1 mutants.

Pridgeon JW, Olzmann JA, Chin LS,
Li L. PINK1 protects against oxidative
stress by phosphorylating mitochondrial
chaperone TRAP1. PLoS Biol 2007;5:e172.
Published online 19 June 2007,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0050172
Clark IE, Dodson MW, Jiang C,
et al. Drosophila pink1 is required for
mitochondrial function and interacts
genetically with parkin. Nature
2006;441:1162-6
This paper and the following one
described phenotypic similarities
between PINK1 and parkin mutations

94.

95.

96.

•

Shults CW, Oakes D, Kieburtz K,
et al. Effects of coenzyme Q10 in early
Parkinson disease: evidence of slowing
of the functional decline. Arch Neurol
2002;59:1541-50
NINDS NET-PD Investigators.
A randomized, double-blind, futility
clinical trial of creatine and minocycline
in early Parkinson disease. Neurology
2006;66:664-71
Chan CS, Guzman JN, Ilijic E, et al.
‘Rejuvenation’ protects neurons in mouse
models of Parkinson’s disease. Nature
2007;447:1081-6
This paper presents evidence that
demonstrated that blockade of the Cav1.3

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

103. Nutt JG, Burchiel KJ, Comella CL,
et al. Randomized, double-blind trial of
glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(GDNF) in PD. Neurology 2003;60:69-73
104. Gill SS, Patel NK, Hotton GR, et al. Direct
brain infusion of glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor in Parkinson disease.
Nat Med 2003;9:589-95
105. Lang AE, Gill S, Patel NK, et al.
Randomized controlled trial of
intraputamenal glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor infusion in Parkinson
disease. Ann Neurol 2006;59:459-66
106. Marks WJ, Ostrem JL, Verhagen L et al.
A Phase I, open-label study of
CERE-120 (adeno-associated virus
serotype 2 [AAV2]-neurturin [NTN])
to assess the safety and tolerability of
intraputaminal delivery to subjects
with idiopathic Parkinson’s disease.
Lancet Neurol 2008 (In Press).

435

Potential therapeutic targets for Parkinson’s disease

107. Ribeiro MJ, Stoessl AJ, Brooks DJ,
et al. Effect of a potential neurotrophic
drug on the progression of dopaminergic
nigrostriatal lesions assessed by 18F-Dopa
PET imaging in Parkinson s disease
[abstract]. Neurology 2008 In press

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Nyu Medical Center on 04/14/15
For personal use only.

108. Pardridge WM. Tyrosine hydroxylase
replacement in experimental Parkinson’s
disease with transvascular gene therapy.
NeuroRx 2005;2:129-38
109. Bankiewicz KS, Forsayeth J, Eberling JL,
et al. Long-term clinical improvement
in MPTP-lesioned primates after gene
therapy with AAV-hAADC. Mol Ther
2006;14:564-70
110. Kordower JH, Herzog CD, Dass B,
et al. Delivery of neurturin by AAV2
(CERE-120)-mediated gene transfer
provides structural and functional
neuroprotection and neurorestoration
in MPTP-treated monkeys. Ann Neurol
2006;60:706-15
111. Lo BC, Schneider BL, Bauer M,
et al. Lentiviral vector delivery of parkin
prevents dopaminergic degeneration in an
α-synuclein rat model of Parkinson’s
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2004;101:17510-5

115. Feigin A, Kaplitt MG, Tang C,
et al. Modulation of metabolic brain
networks after subthalamic gene therapy
for Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2007
116. Luo J, Kaplitt MG, Fitzsimons HL,
et al. Subthalamic GAD gene therapy
in a Parkinson’s disease rat model.
Science 2002;298:425-9
117. Lee CS, Samii A, Sossi V, et al. In vivo
positron emission tomographic evidence
for compensatory changes in presynaptic
dopaminergic nerve terminals in
Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol
2000;47:493-503
118. Brooks DJ, Frey KA, Marek KL,
et al. Assessment of neuroimaging
techniques as biomarkers of the
progression of Parkinson’s disease.
Exp Neurol 2003;184(Suppl 1):S68-79
119. Ravina B, Eidelberg D, Ahlskog JE,
et al. The role of radiotracer imaging
in Parkinson disease. Neurology
2005;64:208-15
120. Quik M, Cox H, Parameswaran N,
et al. Nicotine reduces levodopa-induced
dyskinesias in lesioned monkeys.
Ann Neurol 2007;62(6):588-96

112. Mochizuki H, Yamada M,
Mizuno Y. Parkin gene therapy for
alpha-synucleinopathy: a rat model
of Parkinson’s disease. Parkinsonism
Relat Disord 2006;12(Suppl 2):S107-9

121. Frank MJ, Samanta J, Moustafa AA,
Sherman SJ. Hold your horses:
impulsivity, deep brain stimulation,
and medication in parkinsonism. Science
2007;318:1309-12

113. Hashimoto M, Rockenstein E, Mante M,
et al. An antiaggregation gene therapy
strategy for Lewy body disease utilizing
β-synuclein lentivirus in a transgenic
model. Gene Ther 2004;11:1713-23

122. Deuschl G, Schade-Brittinger C,
Krack P, et al. A randomized trial of
deep-brain stimulation for Parkinson’s
disease. N Engl J Med 2006;355:896-908

114. Kaplitt MG, Feigin A, Tang C, et al.
Safety and tolerability of gene therapy
with an adeno-associated virus (AAV)
borne GAD gene for Parkinson’s disease:
an open label, phase I trial. Lancet
2007;369:2097-105
•
Although this was an open label study
primarily designed to determine safety, the
authors demonstrated efficacy of gene
therapy for PD. This therapy, rather than
targeting the dopamine system directly or
providing trophic support, is based on the
premise of converting the subthalamic
nucleus from an excitatory to an
inhibitory structure. Further evidence
for benefits of the therapy is provided
in the following paper.

436

123. de la Fuente-Fernandez R, Ruth TJ,
Sossi V, et al. Expectation and dopamine
release: mechanism of the placebo effect
in Parkinson’s disease. Science
2001;293:1164-6
•• This paper provided direct evidence for
dopamine release underlying the placebo
effect in PD.
124. de la Fuente-Fernandez R, Stoessl AJ.
The placebo effect in Parkinson’s disease.
Trends Neurosci 2002;25:302-6
125. de la Fuente-Fernandez R, Schulzer M,
Stoessl AJ. Placebo mechanisms and reward
circuitry: clues from Parkinson’s disease.
Biol Psychiatry 2004;56:67-71
126. Lidstone SC, de la Fuente-Fernandez R,
Stoessl AJ. The placebo response as a

Expert Opin. Ther. Targets (2008) 12(4)

reward mechanism. Semin Pain Med
2005;3:37-42
127. Goetz CG, Leurgans S, Raman R.
Placebo-associated improvements in motor
function: comparison of subjective and
objective sections of the UPDRS in early
Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord
2002;17:283-8
128. McRae C, Cherin E, Yamazaki TG,
et al. Effects of perceived treatment on
quality of life and medical outcomes in
a double-blind placebo surgery trial.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004;61:412-20
•
This paper showed that the outcome
following fetal mesencephalic transplant
for PD was determined by which
treatment group patients thought they
were assigned to as opposed to the actual
treatment assignment.
129. Benedetti F, Colloca L, Torre E, et al.
Placebo-responsive Parkinson patients
show decreased activity in single neurons
of subthalamic nucleus. Nat Neurosci
2004;7:587-8
•• In this paper, the authors demonstrated
that patients expecting to receive
apomorphine had a reduction in mean
firing rate and in the pattern of firing
in response to placebo injection.
130. Pollo A, Torre E, Lopiano L, et al.
Expectation modulates the response to
subthalamic nucleus stimulation in
Parkinsonian patients. Neuroreport
2002;13:1383-6

Affiliation
Jon Stoessl CM MD FRCPC
Professor, Neurology,
Director, Pacific Parkinson’s Research Centre &
National Parkinson Foundation
Centre of Excellence,
Canada Research Chair in Parkinson’s disease,
University of British Columbia
and Vancouver Coastal Health,
2221 Wesbrook Mall,
Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada
Tel: +1 604 822 7967; Fax: +1 604 822 7866;
E-mail: jstoessl@interchange.ubc.ca

