Chapter Forty-Two

Molecular and Cellular
Mechanisms of IschemiaI n d m e d Neuronal Death
R. Suzanne Zukin, Teresa Jover, Hidenori Yokota, &ata Calderone,
Monica Simionescu, and C. GeoffLau

Ischemia is the condition or state in which a tissue such as
brain is subjected to hypoxia or low oxygen because of an
obstruction of the arterial blood supply or inadequate
blood flow.' Brain ischemia can be broadly divided into two
main classifications, global ischemia and focal ischemia.
Global ischemia is the condition or state in which blood
flow to the entire brain is transiently blocked, resulting in
delayed, selective neuronal death. Focal ischemia,or cerebral infarction, is the condition or state in which a specific
area of brain tissue undergoes injury as a consequence of
a temporary or permanent obstruction of local blood supply.
Focal ischemia results in death of both neurons and nonneuronal cells in contiguous areas of brain, usually representing a single vascular temtory. In this chapter, we present
the current understanding of the molecular and cellular
mechanisms of neuronal death associated with brain ischemia. Table 42.1 defines the abbreviations used in the text.

GLOBAL ISCHEMIA
Global or brainwide ischemia arises most commonly in
humans as a consequence of cardiac arrest, open-heart
surgery, profuse bleeding, near-drowning, or carbon
monoxide poisoning. Global ischemia associated with
cardiac arrest affects 150,000 Americans each year and, in
most cases, results in delayed onset of neurologic deficit.'a4
The most common neurologic deficits are cognitive impairments, of which memory loss is most notable. Although all
forebrain areas experience oxygen and glucose deprivation
(OGD) during the brief ischemic insult, only select neuronal populations degenerate and die in humansla4 and
in animals subjected experimentally to global ischemia.'
Pyramidal neurons in the cornu ammonis 1 region of the
hippocampus (CA1) are particularly vulnerable. Other
neurons that may be damaged are hilar neurons of the
dentate gyrus (DG), medium aspiny neurons of the striatum, pyramidal neurons in neocortical layers 11, V, and VI,
and Purkinje neurons of the cerebell~m.~~'
The molecular
mechanisms underlying the cell-specific pattern of global
ischemia-induced neuronal death are not well understood.

Histologic evidence of degeneration, or demonstration
of the characteristics of apoptosis, is not observed until 2
to 3 days after ischemia in rats and 3 to 4 days in gerbils.
At 1week after induction of transient global ischemia, virtually complete ablation of the CA1 pyramidal cell layer
can be observed. During the ischemic episode, cells exhibit
a transient, early rise in intracellular calcium ion (Ca"),
depolarize, and become inexcitable; ambient glutamate
rises four-fold to =2pM. After reperfusion, cells appear
morphologically normal, exhibit normal intracellular Ca2+,
and regain the ability to generate action potentials for 24
to 72 hours after the insult. Ultimately, there is a late rise
in intracellular Ca" and zinc ion (Zn"), and death of CA1
pyramidal neurons ensues. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying ischemia-induced death are not yet
completely understood, the substantial delay between
insult and onset of death suggests that transcriptional
changes play a critical role. Candidate transcription factors
that are thought to direct programs of gene expression
changes after global ischemia include the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (CAMP) response element-binding
protein (CREB), the Forkhead family of transcription factors, and the restrictive element (RE)1gene-silencing transcription factor, also known as RESTheuron-restrictive
silencer factor (NRSF).

FOCAL ISCHEMIA
Focal or localized ischemia arises in humans most commonly as a result of stroke, cerebral hemorrhage, or traumatic brain injury. Most strokes are caused by clots that
either form at the site of occlusion in a cerebral artery or
travel there from the heart (classic stroke), and the remainder are caused by a bursting of a weakened blood vessel
in the brain and bleeding into the surrounding tissue (cerebral hemorrhage or traumatic brain injury). Stroke is the
third leading cause of death in the United States and the
primary cause of disabilities in adults. Of the approximately
600,000 new victims each year, nearly 30% die and 20%
to 30%become severely and permanently disabled. Others
829

830

Stroke: Patbopbysiology, Diagnosis, and Management

Table 42.1 Abbreviations Used in Chapter 42
AIF
Akt
AMP
AMPARs
Apaf-1
ATP
BAD
BCCO
BDNF
BIR
CA1
CaMKIV
CBP
CREB
CREM
CSD
DG
DIABLO
DISC
EDTA
EEG
ELK
EPSC
ERa
ERE
ERK
FADD
GABA
GluR
GSK3P
HDAC
HIF-1
HSE
HSP
IAP
ICAM-1
IEG
IGF
IGF-IR
IKB
IL-lP

Apoptosis-inducing factor
Serine-threonine kinase, a proto-oncogenic ser-thr
kinase; also known as protein kinase B
Adenosine inonophosphate
a-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors
Apoptotic protease-activating factor 1
Adenosine triphosphate
A proapoptotic member of the bcl-2 family of
proteins
Bilateral occlusion of the carotid arteries
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor
Baculoviral IAP repeat
Cornu aminonis 1 region of the hippocainpus
Ca2+-calmodulin-dependent kinase IV
CREB-binding protein
Cyclic AMP response element-binding protein
Cyclic AMP-response inodulatory protein
Cortical spreading depression
Dentate gyrus area of the hippocainpus
Direct IAP-binding protein with low PI
Death-inducing signaling complex
Ethylenediaininetetraacetic acid
Electroencephalograin
Nuclear transcription factor
Excitatory postsynaptic current
Estrogen receptor-a
Estrogen response element
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase
Fas-associated death domain
Gamma-aininobutync acid
Glutamate receptor
Glycogen synthase kinase-3P
Histone deacetylase
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1
Heat shock element
Heat shock protein
Inhibitor of apoptosis protein
Intercellular adhesion molecule-1
Immediate early gene
Insulin-like growth factor
IGF-I receptor
Inhibitor of NF-KB
Interleukin- 1P

suffer paralysis, reduced coordination, and neurologic
deficits including impaired cognition, visual disturbance,
and loss of sensation. People older than 65 years experience
almost three fourths of all strokes. “Brain attack can be
studied through the implementation of focal ischemia on
animal models.
Tissues at risk of harm from occlusion of a cerebral
artery are the core or center of the stroke, which contains
cells that are highly dependent on the blocked artery and
receive essentially no blood, and the penumbra or surrounding region, which contains cells that receive some
blood from other arteries (Plate 42-1C following page 840).
Cells in the core die from several overwhelming causes and
probably cannot be salvaged by any treatment short of
immediate removal of the clot. Although the infarct starts
in the core, at its maximum it encompasses both core and
penumbra, generally after 6 to 24 hours of permanent
ischemia.8 The duration of the ischemic episode determines the extent or grade of damage, assessed 1 to 2 days

IRS-1
LTD
LTP
MAPK
MCAO
inGluR
MKP-1
MnSOD

NAD+
NADPH
Naspin
NF-KB
NGF
NMDARs
nNOS
NO
NOS
()?+

NSRF
OGD
ONOOPARP-1
PCD
PCR
PI3K
PKA
PP1
PSD-95
PV
REST
ROS
Rsk
RT-PCR
SinaC
TNF
TRAIL
VDAC

vo

ZnT-3

Insulin receptor substrate-1
Long-term depression
Long-term potentiation
Mitogen-activated protein kinase
Middle cerebral artery occlusion
Metabotropic GluR
MAPK phosphatase-1
Manganese superoxide dismutase
P-Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, oxidized
form
Nicotinainide adenine dinucleotide phosphate,
reduced form
Naphthyl acetyl sperinine
Nuclear factor kappa B
Nerve growth factor
N-methybaspartate (NMDA) receptors
Neural NOS
Nitric oxide
NO synthase
Superoxide anion
Neuron-restrictive silencer factor; also known as
REST
Oxygen and glucose deprivation
Peroxynitrite
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1
Programmed cell death
Polymerase chain reaction
Phosphatidylinositol3-kinase
Protein kinase A
Protein phosphatase 1
Postsynaptic density protein of 95 kDa
Parvalbumin
Repressor element gene silencing transcription
factor; also known as NRSF
Reactive oxygen species
Ribosomal S6 kinase
Reverse transcription-PCR
Second initochondria-derived activator of
caspases
Tumor necrosis factor
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
Voltage-dependent anion channel
Vessel occlusion
Zn2+transporter-3

after reperfusion.9 At 10 to 20 minutes after induction of
focal ischemia, only a few scattered dead neurons are
observed in the core. At 1 hour, infarct is observed in the
core, and the infarct size is maximal. The mechanisms
underlying death of cells in the core are complicated but
most certainly include glutamate receptor-mediated
necrotic cell death (see later). Brain edema (as studied
with magnetic resonance imagmg [MRI] and computed
tomography [CT]) serves as one of the earliest markers for
the ensuing pathophysiology and is a key determinant of
whether a patient survives beyond the first few hours after
stroke.

EXPERIMENTAL MODELS OF
GLOBAL AND FOCAL ISCHEMIA
A number of experimental models are currently used to
study brain ischemia. The three main paradigms involving

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

intact animals (in vivo ischemia) are global ischemia, focal
ischemia, and hypoxia-ischemia, a condtion that shares
properties with both focal and global ischemia. In vivo
models of global ischemia enable neuronal death to mature
in an intact animal in which neural circuitry is preserved.
Therefore, these models have greater physiologic validity
and clinical relevance to global ischemia associated with
cardiac arrest in humans than in vitro models.
In vitro models are also used to examine molecular and
biophysical mechanisms of neuronal death. These models
are particularly useful for suppression or overexpression of
genes of interest. In vitro models involving organotypically
cultured brain slices are particularly useful in that they
afford preservation of neural circuitry.

831

2. Neural circuitry is preserved.
3. The substantial delay between insult and neuronal
death enables detailed molecular stumes.
4. The specificity of cell death allows comparison of
molecular changes in CA1 with those in CA3.
5. The cranium is completely blocked (rather than reduced by hypotension); thus, monitoring of blood flow
is not necessary.
6. Animals exhibit no obvious behavioral manifestations,
and the mortality rate is low.

The rare animals that do exhibit obvious behavioral manifestations (abnormal vocalization when handled, generalized convulsions, loss of greater than 20% of body weight
by 3 to 7 days, hypoactivity) are excluded from the study.

In Vivo Models
Four-Vessel Occlusion Model i n Rats
Global Ischemia
The
4-VO model is a well-established model of neuronal
Global ischemic insults consist of brief but nearly complete
insult
in which neuronal death is largely restricted to
cessation of cerebral blood flow produced by permanent
pyramidal
neurons of the hippocampal CA1 and does not
occlusion of the vertebral arteries and transient occlusion
3 to 4 days after insult.'' A specific advanmanifest
until
of the common carotid arteries (rats) or by transient occlutage
of
the
rat
model is that many available complemension of the common carotid arteries (gerbils and mice),
tary
DNA
(cDNA)
and RNA probes are directed to rat
followed by reperfusion."," The most commonly used
RNA,
and
many
antibodies
exhibit high specificity for rat
models of global ischemia are (1)the four-vessel occlusion
tissue
and
may
not
recognize
epitopes in other species.
(4-VO) model in rats"; (2) the two-vessel occlusion (2-VO;
or Wistar rats, weighAge-matched
male
Sprague
Dawley
also known as temporary bilateral common carotid occluing
100
to
125
g
are
fasted
overnight;
the next day, animals
sion, or BCCO) in gerbils7.l3or (less commonly) m i ~ e ' ~ . ' ~ ;
are
anesthetized
with
halothane.
The
vertebral arteries
and (3)two-vessel occlusion in combination with hypotenare
exposed
through
a
small
incision
in
the
neck and subsion in rats." Global ischemia can also be induced in large
jected
to
permanent
electrocauterization.
The common
mammals such as monkeys15 and goats.16 Global ischemic
carotid arteries are exposed and isolated with a 3-0 silk
insults are typically short (on the order of 5 to 20 minutes).
thread, and the wound is sutured. Twenty-four hours later,
During the ischemic episode, blood flow to the entire brain
the wound is reopened, and the common carotid arteries
is reduced (to < 1%)essentially immediately and remains
are subjected to temporary occlusion with surgical clasps
blocked until reperfusion. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
(4 minutes for sublethal ischemia and 10 minutes for
is depleted in cells throughout the brain essentially immeglobal ischemia), and anesthesia is discontinued (Plate
diately but recovers to near physiologic levels by the time
42-lA).'2~22At the time of occlusion of the carotid arteries,
of reperfusion. l7
blood flow is typically reduced to less than 3% of normal
The 4-VO model in rats and the 2-VO model in gerbils
in the hi pocampus, striatum, and neo~ortex.'~
The elecdiffer from more severe models involving hypotension, in
troencep alogram (EEG) generally becomes i~oelectric'~
that neuronal death is extremely delayed and highly speand spontaneous cortical activity is abolished within 1
cific. Although all forebrain areas experience OGD during
minute.= For sham operation, animals are subjected to
a brief ischemic insult, neuronal death elicited by a brief
the same anesthesia and surgical exposure procedures,
episode (10 minutes for 4-VO in rats; 5 minutes for 2-VO
except that the carotid arteries are not occluded. Although
in gerbils) is largely restricted to pyramidal neurons of
anesthesia is typically administered until occlusion of
the hippocampal CA1 and hilar neurons (Plate 42-1B)."
the carotid arteries, it is not essential to the surgical
Inhibitory interneurons of the CA1 and most neurons in
procedure.
the nearby CA2 or transition zone, CA3, and DG survive.
With the exception of a few scattered hilar neurons or
Two-Vessel Occlusion with Hypotension i n Rats
pyramidal neurons in the cortex, no other neurons exhibit
An alternative model of global ischemia in rats involves ligcell death. Although these models afford virtual ablation
ation of the common carotid (but not vertebral) arteries,
of the hippocampal CA1 by 7 days, the onset of histologitogether with systemic hypotension (50mm Hg). Under
cally detectable neuronal death is not manifested until
more than 48 hours in
or more than 72 hours in
these conditions, blood flow falls to 1% in the hippocamand the EEG becomes
gerbil^,'^'^*^^ after insult. Longer insults induce more wide- pus, striatum, and neo~ortex,2~~*~
isoelectric within 15 to 25 seconds." Animals are subjected
spread damage to areas such as medium aspiny striatal
to anesthesia for the entire duration of the ischemic
neurons, pyramidal neurons in neocortical layers 11,V, and
episode. Models of global ischemia involving systemic
VI, and cerebellar Purkinje neuron^.^*^
hypoxia and/or hypotension are more severe than the 4-VO
Advantages of the in vivo models of global ischemia are
model. These models cause a more rapid onset of generas follows:
alized neuronal death, particularly in the cortex, striatum,
1. They have clinical relevance to global ischemia associand hippocampus, major behavioral manifestations, and a
considerable death rate.
ated with cardiac arrest in humans.

K

832

Stroke: PatbopbysioloBy, Diagnosis, and Management

Two-Vessel Occlusion in Gerbils
Gerbils are advantageous for studies of global ischemia in
that they lack posterior communicating arteries, structures
that in humans and rats are necessary to complete the
circle of Willis and permit collateral blood flow. Thus,
global ischemia can be induced in gerbils by the relatively
simple 2-VO model. In gerbils, 2-VO (5 minutes) elicits
highly selective, extremely delayed neuronal death, with a
pattern of cell specificity virtually identical to that in rats;
neuronal death is not manifested until more than 72 hours
after onset.'"*' The 2-VO model is the model of global
ischemia most commonly used for testing neuroprotective
agents. Within 20 seconds of 2-V0, blood flow falls to 1%
in neocortex and to 4% in hippocampus," and the EEG
becomes isoelectric.3" Anesthesia is administered until
occlusion of the carotid arteries.
Two-Vessel Occlusion in Mice
Mice offer advantages in that some strains (C57/BL6
and related strains) exhibit global ischemia in response to
the relatively simple 2-VO model, enabling comparisons
between animals with null mutations in a gene of interest
and their wild-type littermates. However, strain differences
in vulnerability to ischemic damage can complicate
results.J1 In mice, 2-VO (20 minutes) elicits somewhat
selective, delayed cell death. A t 72 hours after ischemia, the
majority of animals exhibit no detectable cell loss in the hippocampus; in one study, about 17% of animals exhibited
minor cell loss and another 17% showed moderate cell loss
in the CA1.I4 At 7 days after ischemia, nearly all animals
exhibited marked loss in the pyramidal cell layer of CA1. In
the majority of animals, CA3 exhibited at most slight cell
loss, and the DG exhibited no cell loss at 7 days.

Focal Ischemia
Focal ischemia is the animal model that most near1
approximates stroke or cerebral infarction in humans.3 2 2
Focal ischemia is produced experimentally by occlusion of
the middle cerebral artery. Arterial occlusion can be permanent (arterial blockade maintained throughout the
experiment) or temporary (occlusion for up to 3 hours, followed by reperfusion) and either proximal or distal (see
later). These procedures induce a necrotic core of cells that
are irreversibly damaged and a penumbra of cells that can
be revived (see Plate 42-1C).35 Focal ischemia is typically
performed in rodents such as rats or mice. For rats, a preferred strain is the spontaneously hypertensive rat, which
exhibits reduced collateral circulation during the ischemic
episode.3fi3h
Proximal Occlusion
In the case of proximal occlusion, the middle cerebral
artery (MCA) is subjected to occlusion close to its branching from the internal carotid, before the origin of the
lenticulostriate arteries." 3fi Proximal MCA occlusion
(MCAO) is most commonly induced by ligation of the
common carotid and external carotid arteries, followed by
insertion of a suture into the internal carotid artery at the
bifurcation of the common carotid and external carotid
arteries. The suture is advanced intraluminally beyond the
origin of the posterior communicating artery and past the
origin of the MCA (see Plate 42-1A).'0"33 After MCAO,
blood flow is nonuniformly reduced throughout the

affected region. The center of the stroke, or core, is
defined as the region in which blood flow is reduced to less
than 15%; it encompasses the lateral portion of the caudate
putamen and the parietal cortex. The penumbra, defined
as the region in which blood flow is reduced to less than
40%, encompasses the remainder of the neocortex, the
entorhinal cortex, and the medial caudate-putamen.
Distal Occlusion
In distal MCAO, blood flow to the basal ganglia is not
interrupted; thus, damage is restricted to the neocortex.
This type of occlusion can be induced surgically by means
of a clip3' or by inducing thrombotic clots3xJ9in combination with transient unilateral occlusion of the common
carotid a r t e r i e ~ . The
~ " ~reduction
~ ~ ~ ~ of blood flow achieved
in the core and penumbra with distal MCAO is similar to
that achieved in the proximal model.

Hypoxia-Ischemia
The hypoxia-ischemia model involves transient unilateral
occlusion of the common carotid artery in combination
with systemic hypoxia, such that oxygen flow to the brain
is reduced to 3% in adult rats or to 8% in neonates."24
After 15 to 30 minutes of hypoxia, delayed neuronal death
occurs in the hippocampal CA1 and CA3, striatum, and
layer V of the neocortex in adults.4s Young rats show
delayed development of infarct, which can be induced by
subjecting them to low levels of oxygen (8%of normal) for
60 minutes.4fi

In Vitro Models
Oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) of cell cultures or
brain slices provides an in vitro model of global ischemia
(Plate 42-2).4749In vitro models require longer periods of
OGD to induce cell death, and ATP levels do not fall as
much as in in vivo models. The absence of blood vessels
and blood flow simplifies interpretation of the results but
renders the model less relevant than a model using an
intact animal. Advantages of the in vitro OGD model are
as follows:

1. Manipulations of the microenvironment can be more
precise.
2. The model is amenable to patch clamp recording and
detailed electrophysiologic analyses.
3. Prolonged survival of cultures permits molecular and
genetic manipulations as, for example, ease of antisense
suppression of a protein of interest by administration of
antisense oligonucleotides.
4. It allows optical monitoring of changes in the same slice
over days.
5. It enables internal control of a number of slices that can
be obtained from the same animal.
Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation of Dissociated
Neurons in Culture
In vitro OGD is performed in primary cultures of neurons
or glia from the neocortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, and
hypothalamus of embryonic or early postnatal rats or mice.
Mixed neocortical specimens containing both neurons and
glia are typically cultured from embryonic day 15 (E15)
rats." At 14 days in vitro (DIV), the culture medium is

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

exchanged with deoxygenated, glucose-free salt solution to
induce OGD. Cultures are deprived of oxygen and glucose
for 90 to 100 minutes and then transferred to an oxygenated serum-free medium containing glucose and propidium iodide. Cell death is assayed at 24 and 48 hours.
Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation in Cultured
Hippocampal Slices
Ischemic damage is also studied in organotypic hippocampal slice cultures from perinatal rats. Typically, hippocampal slices are obtained from rat pups (postnatal day 8,or P8)
and maintained in vitro for 14 to 21 days.51Briefly, hippocampi are removed from rat brains, and transverse slices
are cut with a tissue chopper in a sterile environment. Isolated slices are placed in ice-cold Hanks balanced salt solution supplemented with glucose and Fungizone and then
transferred to humidified semiporous membranes. Slices
are maintained in culture medium at 37°C and 95% air/5%
GO,. At 14 to 21 DIV, hippocampal slices are subjected
to OGD by exposure to a serum-free medium devoid of
glucose and saturated with 95% NJ5% GO, for 30 to 60
minutes, then transferred to an oxygenated serum-free
medlum containing glucose and propidlum iodide. Cell
death is assayed at 48 and 72 hours. A 30-minute insult
elicits selective death of CA1 neurons by48 hours (see Plate
42-2). Neuronal death is typically assessed from permeability to dyes such as trypan blue and propidium iodide."'
In vitro ischemia impairs synaptic transmission, protein
synthesis, ATP production, and neuron morphology.

MODALITIES OF ISCHEMIC
CELL DEATH
Cell death occurs by necrosis or apopto~is.'~."These two
mechanisms have distinct histologic and biochemical signatures. In necrosis, the stimulus of death (e.g., ischemia)
is itself often the direct cause of the demise of the cell. In
apoptosis, however, the stimulus of death activates a
cascade of events that orchestrate the destruction of the
cell. Unlike necrosis, which is a pathologic process, apoptosis is part of normal development; however, aberrant
apoptosis occurs in response to injurious stimuli.
Global ischemia induces neuronal death with hallmarks
of both necrosis and apoptosis.55Ultrastructural studies
indicate that global ischemia induces many of the morphologic features of necrotic cell death in CA1 neurons
(see later) but do not detect critical hallmarks of a optosis
such as apoptotic bodies.56Thus, apoptosis as de ned by
stereotypic morphologic changes, especially evident in the
nucleus where the chromatin condenses to compact an
apparently simple geometric figure, does not occur. These
and other studies cast doubt as to whether global ischemia
elicits any of the morphologic features of apoptosis. Strong
evidence in support of apoptosis, defined as activation of
specific intracellular signaling cascades that result in cellular s ~ i c i d e , ~comes
~ , ~ ' from molecular studies that show
mitochondrial release of cytochrome c and activation of the
caspases, in particular caspase-3 (see later).
Focal ischemia also induces neuronal death with hallmarks of both necrosis and apoptosis." Focal ischemia
elicits early cell shrinkage and swelling of mitochondria,

E

833

followed by cell dispersal, shrinkage of the nucleus, the
formation of cytoplasmic projections, and, ultimately, a
shrunken, pyknotic nucleus without surrounding cytoplasm (the last remnant of the dead neuron). The early
mitochondrial swelling and loss of integrity of the plasma
membrane, with preservation of the nuclear membrane,
are hallmarks of necrotic cell death. Evidence in support
of apoptotic death in the penumbra has surfaced, including DNA fragmentation, activation of death receptors,
mitochondrial release of cytochrome c, and activation of
the caspase death cascade (see later).

Necrotic Cell Death
Necrosis is the death of a circumscribed area of tissue as
a result of a wide variety of injuries. At the light-microscopic level, the morphologic hallmarks of necrotic cell
death are early mitochondrial swelling and loss of integrity
of the plasma membrane, with preservation of the nuclear
membrane. At the ultrastructural level, the hallmarks of
necrotic cell death are proliferation of endoplasmic reticulum, disaggregation of polyribosomes, selective swelling
of dendrites, and dllation of organelles and intranuclear
vacuoles. The necrotic tissue morphology is to a large
extent due to postmortem events occurring after cell lysis.
Necrotic cell death can be divided into two main states,
edematous death, characterized by edema or organelle
swelling, and ischemic death. The edematous state is characterized by swollen cytoplasm, the absence of dynamic
plasma membrane blebbing of a dying cell (zeiosis),
absence of microtubules, and presence of the endoplasmic
reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and polysomes as incomplete
structures. Although the nucleus appears nearly normal,
irregular clumping of chromatin is
These characteristics are observed for CA1 neurons undergoing delayed
death in the rat and gerbil models of global ischemia."',6'
By contrast, the ischemic state is characterized by darkening and shrinkage of the nucleus and cytoplasm";
the
plasma and nuclear membranes become highly irregular,
and the cell assumes a triangular shape. Cells undergoing
ischemic cell change are acidophilic. In models of global
ischemia, CA1 neurons exhibit edematous changes in the
end stages of degeneration. In focal ischemia, cortical
neurons in the core and penumbra exhibit morphologic
changes before their demise.

Apoptotic Cell Death
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death (PCD), is the evolutionarily conserved process by which cells die as a result of
an internally programmed series of events mediated by a
dedicated set of gene products. Apoptotic cell death is
essential during development (embryogenesis) and tissue
homeostasis; when dysregulated, apoptotic cell death can
result in cancer, abnormal neuronal death, or autoimmunity. A variety of injurious stimuli, including focal ischemia
and global ischemia, can induce apoptosis if the insult is
mild but will induce necrosis with a stronger insult. Apoptotic neurons exhibit characteristic morphologic features
that dlfferentiate them from necrotic neurons-cytoplasmic shrinkage, chromatin condensation, zeiosis (dynamic
membrane blebbing), and apoptotic bodies. Unlike

A

B

C

PLATE 42-1 Global and focal ischemia elicits difierent spatiotemporal patterns of cell death. A, Diagram of the cerebrovascular
anatomy ofthe rat, illustrating the permanent electrocauterization of the vertebral arteries ( 1 ) and the position of the surgical clips in
the comnwn carotid arteries (2) in a four-vessel occlusion (4-VO) model (left) and the intraluminal suture during occlusion in the temporanj focal ischemia model (right). AA, arch of the aorta; ACA, anterior cerebral artey; BA, basilar arte y; CCA, common carotid
arte y; ECA, external carotid arte y ; ICA, internal carotid arte y ; MCA, middle cerebral arte y ; PCA, posterior cerebral arte y; SA,
subclavian artenj; VA, vertebral artey. B, Toluidine blue staining of coronal brain sections at the level of the dorsal hippocampus from
control (a and b) and experimental male rats subjected to global ischemia at 48 hours (c and d) and 7 days (e and f) after ischemia. At
48 hours after global ischemia, there was no histologically detectable neuronal death in any hippocampal subjield. At 7 clays after
ischemia, the pyramidal cell layer of CAI exhibited dramatic loss of neurons, whereas CA3 (region 3) and dentate gyrus showed no
clamage. so, stratum oriens; sp, stratum pyramidale; sr, stratum radiatum. (Scale bars: lower magnijication, 400pm; higher magnijication, 40pm.) View g shows quantitation of cell counts from brain sections illustrated in a through f To assess hippocampal injury, the
number ofsurviving neurons per 250-pm length in the pyramidal cell layer ofthe medial CAI (cornu amnwnis 1 region of the hippocanipus) was counted under a light microscope at 40x magnijication in sections. Neuronal counts from a minimum of four microscopic sections per animal were analyzed; comparisons among group means were made using the Student t-test (P < ,001). C, The core
and penumbra of ischemia are induced by focal blockade of cerebral arteries. A brain region of low perfusion in which cells have lost
their membrane potential terminally (core) is surrounded by an area in which intermediate perfusion prevails (penumbra) and celb
depolarize intermittently (pen-infarct depolarization”. From the onset of thefocal perfusion dejicit, the core and penumbra are dynamic
in space and time. Perfusion thresholds exist below which certain biochemical functions are impeded (color-coded scale). (A adapted
from Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S,, et al: Reversible middle cerebral a r t e y occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke
20:84-91, 1989; C from Dirnagl U, ladecola C , Moskowitz MA: Pathobiology of ischaemic stroke: An integrated view. Trends Neurosci
22:391397, 2999.)

h after OGD

PLATE 42-2 Oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) is a well-established in vitro
nwclel (8global ischemia. Organotypically cultured hippocampal slices are inaintainedfor 14 to 21 days in vitro (DIV) and subjected to OGD by exposure to serutnfree nwdiiitn devoid of glucose and saturated with 95% N2/5% GO2for 30 to 60
minutes. Slices are then transferred to oxygenated, senim-jiree mediiitn containing
glucose and propidiion iodide. OGD (20- to 30-minute insult) elicits delayed, selective neuronal death, prinmrily of CAl (cornu amnionis 1 region of the hippocampus)
neurons, ns occurs after transient global ischemia in the intact animal. Cell death is
assessed by propidiion iodide uptake due to breakdown of the integrity ofthe plasma
membrane as cells enter the initial stages of cell death. A, A control slice shows no
uptake of propidinin iodide. B to D, Time course of neuronnl death in the CAI subfield at 24 hours (B), 48 hours (C), and 72 hmirs (D) after OGD. DG, dentate gyms.
E, Quantitation of dnta like those shown in B to D. ( K M . Noh, unpublished observations, 2003).

PLATE 42-3 Signaling from the death receptor triggers the extrinsic pathway ofapoptosis. Upon binding of Fas ligancl, Fas is a d i vated and recruits procaspase-8. The procaspase-8 transactivates, and the mature caspase cleaves and activates procaspase-3, leading
to apoptosis. Signaling froin the Fas receptor to mitochondria invo1ve.s cleavage of the BH3-only protein BID by caspase-8. BID subsequently induces release of cytochronw c (cyt c ) as well as downstreani apoptotic events. Formation of the apoptosoiw lea& to the
activation of caspase-9 and subsequently caspase-3. Caspase-3, the “terminator” protein, exerts its apoptotic effects by several means,
including the activation of caspme-activated DNase (CAD), which leads to the cleavage of genomic DNA and apoptosis. Heat shock
protein 70 (HSP70) inhibits the oligomerization of apoptotic protease-activating factor-1 (Apafl) and the release ofcytoclzrome c from
the mitochondria, thus inhibiting apoptosis. ICAD, inhibitor of CAD. Arrows indicate the activation of the targets, whereas lines with
blunt en& indicate their inndivation. (Adapted from Zimmerniann KC, Bonzon C, Green DR: The inachiney of programmed cell
death. Phannacol Ther 9257-70, 2001 .)

PLATE 4 2 4 Mitochondria1 demise induces apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway. Cellular stress induces pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family
numbers to translocate from the cytosol to the mitochondria, where they induce the release of cytochrome c. Cytochrome c (Cyt C )
catalyzes the oligomerization of A p a f l (Apafl), which recntits and promotes the activation of procaspase-9. This substance, in turn,
activates procaspase-3, leading to apoptosis. Also illustrated is another mitochondria1 activator of caspases, SmacIDlABLO (second
mitochondria-derived activator of caspasesldirect IAP [inhibitor of apopotosis protein] binding protein with low isoelectric point)
(Diablo). Cytochrome c and SmacIDlABLO are released in a coordinated fashion from the mitochondria upon an apoptotic stimuli.
While cytochrome c activates A p a f l , SnulcIDlABLO relieves the inhibition on caspases by binding to inhibitor of apoptosis proteins
(1AP.s).B y this means, SnulcIDIABLO disrupts the association of IAPs with processed caspase-9, allowing caspase-9 to activate caspase3, leading to apoptosis. Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) inhibits apoptosis via several pathways, (1) by precenting the release of
cytochrome c and oligomerization of A p a f l , thus inhibiting the formation of the apoptosome, and (2)by inhibiting the release of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF). nNOS, nezironal nitric oxide synthase; ONOO-, peroxynitrite; PARP-I, Poly(ADP-ribose)polynierase-1.
(Adapted from Z i m m e m n n KC, Bonzon C , Green DR: The machinery of programmed cell death. Phannacol Ther 92:57-70, 2001.)

PLATE 42-5 The poly(ADP-ribose)polyi~rase-l(PARP-I) is an key player in ischemic neuronal death. A, Insults to cells such as
ischemia and stress can activate PARP-I, resulting in the release of apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF)from the mitochondria. A I F can
induce chromatin condensation and mitochondria1 permneabilization independent of cytochrome c, thus triggering apoptotic cell death.
PARP-1 can activate NF-KB, a transcription factor that has a crucial role in the regulation of genes inooloed in inflainnuztoy response,s.
PARP-1 also transactivates p53, a transcription factor critical in the execution of apoptosis. B, A model of PARP overactioationmediated cytotoxicity. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as nitric oxide (NO), superoxide anion (,02-)
and peroxynitrite (ONOO-)
are generated during inflammation or ischemia-repe+sion. These ROS damage cellular molecules like proteins, lipids, and DNA. DNA
daniage actioates PARP-I, synthesizing poly(ADP-ribose)polymer froin it.s substrate Pnicotinaniide adenine dinucleotide (NAD').
Limited arnounts of DNA damage can be repaired by cellular DNA repair enzymes, and PARP-I, in this case, acts as a sensorfor DNA
dunzage, nwdulating the repair process. In apoptotic cell death, activated caspases cleaoe PARP-1 protein to inhibit a futile DNA repair
process and preserve cellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is essential for the apoptotic process. Extensive DNA damage can
lead to overactioation of PARP With excessive activation of PARP, NAD' is depleted, and in efforts to resynthesize NAD', ATP is also
depleted. Hence, necrotic cell death involves energy loss. Depletion of ATP can transform an ongoing apoptotic process into necrosis
with intracellular ATP levels regulating the mode of cell death. (A adapted froin Chiarugi A: Poly(ADP-ribose) polynlerase: Killer or
conspirator? The 'suicide hypothesis' revisited. Trends Pharrnacol Sci 23:122-129, 2002; B froin Ha HC, Snyder S H : Poly(ADP-ribose)
polyiilerase-1 in the nervous system. Neurohiol Dis 7:225-239, 2000.)

see legend on opposite page.

A

GluRl

GluR2

GIuR3

Control

Ischemia

.-5

B

a
a
g

120

Q)

a

60

-

control 12 h 24 h 48 h
Zinc is translocated from the nwssyjibers to the CAI
(cornu animonis 1 region of the hippocampus) pyramidal neuron cell
body after global ischemia, as revealed by TSQ staining. Fluorescent photomicrograph of a normal rat hippocampus after staining
with TSQ, showing dense fluorescence in the hilus ( H ) and the
stratum luciduin (SL)of CA3. In addition, TSQ staining is seen in the
stratum radiatuni (SR) and the stratum oriens (SO)of CAI. No Zn2'
jluorescence is seen in the stratum pyramidale (SP) or alveus (ah.) of
CAI (dark bands). DG, dmtate g i p s . (Scale bar, 800mm.) B,
Twentylfour hours after a IO-minureforebrain ischemia, TSQ fluorescence is recluceci in presynaptic terminah and is newly apparent
in the cell bodies of some hilar neurons. (Scale bar, 200mm.) C, The
s u m hippocampal section as in B, with subsequent acidfuchsin staining. All the TSQ-fluorescent neurons in C exhibited ischemic acidophilic changes (pink cytoplasm, arrows). (Scale bar, 200mm.) D,
Seventy-two hours after a 10-minute period of ischemia, dense TSQ
staining appeared in degenerating CAI pyramidal neurons. (Scale
bar, l00inm.) E , The same section as in D, with acid fuchsin staining. All the CAI neurons with Zn2' fluorescence showed acidophilic
changes. (Scale bar, l00inm.) (From KohJY, Suh
Gwag B], et al:
The role of zinc in selective neuronal death after transient global cerebral ischemia. Science 272:1013-1016, 1996.)
PLATE 42-7

Sw

3

5

ischemia

control 24h

D

48h

Q)

3

5

-

control 24h

48h

ischemia

PLATE 42-6 Global ischemia induces GluR2 messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein downregulation in the hippocampus. A, Global
ischemia downregulates the mRNA expression of GluR2, as demonstrated by in situ hybridization. Pseudocolor display of Amities of
autoradiograms of GluRl, G l u m , and GluR3 mRNA localization in coronal sections of control and post-ischemic rat brains at the level
of the hippocampus: a, GluRl expression in control (sham-operated) brain; b, GluRl expression in ischemic rats 24 hours after 10
minutes of global ischemia; c, GluR2 expression in control; d, GluR2 expression 24 hours after ischemia, showing dramatic and selective reduction in CAI (cornu amnwnis 1 region of the hippocampus) labeling; e, GluR3 expression in control brain; f, GluR3 expression 24 hours after ischemia, showing that reduction in CAI is not as marked as in d and extends through CA3. Cx, neocortex; DG,
dentate gyms. (Scale bar, 1 mm.) B, The downregulation of GluR2 mRNA is apparent at 24 hours after ischemia. C and D, Ischemia
reduces the protein expression ofGluR.2 in the CAI area, as shown by Western blot analysis. ( Afrom Pellegrini-Giampietro DE, Zukin
RS, Bennett MY,et al: Switch in glutamate receptor subunit gene expression in CAI subjield of hippocampusfollowing global ischemia
in rats. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89:10499-10503, 1992; B through D from Calhrone A, lover T, Noh Kh4, et al: Ischemic insults
&repress the gene silencer REST in neurons destined to die. J Neurosci 23:2112-2121, 2003.)

Control

24 h after 10 min
global ischemia;
hilus

72 h after 10 min
global ischemia;
CAI stratum
pyramidale
PLATE 42-8 FOXO-3A/FKHRLl is a member of the Forkhead family of transcriptionfactors, which is implicated in death pathways
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Within the nucleus, FOXO-3A triggers apoptosis by transactivation of target genes such as Fas ligand (FasL)
and TRAIL. FasL, in turn, activates the cell surface death receptor Fas, which initiates the caspase death cascade via the extrinsic
pathway of apoptotic cell death. In the presence of survival factors, the serinelthreonine kinase Akt ( P a ) phosphoylates FOXO-3A,
leading to its association with 14-3-3 proteins and cytoplasmic retention and sequestration away from nuclear target genes. Ischemia
promotes dephosphoylation (activation)of FOXO-3A in CAI, evident at 12 and 24 hours. Estrogen induces phosphoylation (inactivation) of FOXO-3A in control CAI and attenuates ischemia-induced dephosphoylation of FOXO-3A. BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; DBD, DNA-binding domain of the FOXO-3A; IGF-I, insulin-like growth factor-1; NGF, nerve growth factor; NLS,
nuclear localization signal; P, phosphate group; P13K, phosphotidylinositol 3-kinase; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase. (Adapted from
Burgering BM, Kops G]: Cell cycle and death control: Long live Forkheads. Trends Biochem Sci 27:352360, 2002.) (lover, et al.,
unpublished observations, 2003.)

PLATE 42-1 0 Neurotrophins promote cell survival by antagonizing apoptotic proteins. In the presence of survival factors, the PI3KAkt/SGK pathway is activated. The serinelthreonine kinase Akt and serum glucocorticoid inducible kinase (SGK) prezjent the esecution of apoptosis at several lezjels, in both transcription-dependent and transcription-independent manners. Akt and SGK phosphoylate
and inhibit the transcriptionfactor FOX0 (or FKHRLI), and Akt indirectly inhibits p53 (a transcription factor critical in the esecution of apoptosis), thereby preventing the expression of their target death genes. Akt also indirectly activates nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-@), leading to the expression of survival genes, such as A l , Bcl-xL, and IAP In addition, Akt acts at a step before cytochroine c
release, preventing the association of the pro-apoptoticfamily member BAD with Bcl-xL, which allows Bcl-xL to promote cell sumizjal.
Furthermore, Akt may act at a step subsequent to cytochroine c release, possibly by phosphoylating caspase-9 (cusp-9),apoptotic protease-activatedfactor (APAF-I),or the IAPs. BDNF, brain-derived neurotropliicfactor; IGF-I, insulin-like growthfactor-];NGF, nerve
growth factor; PDKI, phosphoinositide-dependentkinase-1; P13y Phosphotidylinositol 3-kinase. Reproduced, with permission, from
Brunet A, Datta SR, Greenberg M E : Transcription-dependent and -independent control of neuronal survizjal by the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:297305, 2001.)

PLATE 42-9 The neuronal repressor element-1 silencing transcription f&or (REST) is critical to GluR2 downregulation and
ischemia-induced neuronal death. Global ischemia induces REST, a member of the Gli-Kriippelfamily of zinc-jinger transcriptional
repressors containing nine noncanonical zinc finger mot$, through which it binds the cis-acting neuronul repressor element ( R E I ) .
REST associates with the co-repressors Sin3A and Co-REST, which in turn recruit histone deacetylases (HDAC) to the promoters of
target genes, including the GluR2 gene subunit of the AMPA (a-amino-3-hydrmy-S-methyl-4-ismamle-prop~nic
acid) receptor
(AMPAR). Deacetylation of histone proteins and tightening of the core chromatin complex restrids access of the transcription m h i n enj required for gene activation. Decreased expression of GluR2 protein increases the Ca2' permeability of AMPA-type glutamate receptors, cwacerbating excitotoxicity and increasing the extent of neuronal death. AUG, start co&n of GluR2; N R F I , nuclear respiratoy
factor-1; S p l , regulatory transcriptionfactor

see legend on opposite page.

PLATE 42-1 1 Estrogen acts via the PI3K (phosphotidylinositol 3-kinase) and/or MAPK (mitogen-actiuatedprotein kinase) signaling
pathways to afford neuroprotection. Estrogen ( E )exerts neuroprotection via genomic and nongenomic actions. In the classical, genornic
model, Estrogen binds to estrogen receptor (ER) a and/or ERP, and the activated receptor transactivates target genes, which contain
the estrogen response element (ERE). Bcl-2 is a pro-apoptotic protein, and the bcl-2 gene is a critical estrogen target. Estrogen also
acts in the cytosol to activate PI3K and/or MAPK signaling via nongenoniic mechanisms. Cross-talk between estrogen and the insulinlike growth factor (IGF) signaling can occur nongenomically. Activation of ERa leads to fornlation of a supramolecular complex cornposed of the IGF receptor (IGFR), ERa, and PI3Y thereby activating PI3K Activation of PI3K stimulates phosphonjlation and
activation of the serine/threonine kinme Akt (PKB).Akt, in turn, phosphoylates and inactivates the pro-apoptotic proteins FOXO-3A,
Bad, and cmpase-g and thereby halts apoptosis. DBD, DNA-binding domain of the ER;]NY c-jun N-terminal kinase.

834

Stroke: PatbopbysioloJy, Diagnosis, and Management

necrotic cells, in which plasma membrane is damaged
early, apoptotic cells exhibit intact plasma membranes until
the last stages of death, at which time the membranes
become permeable to normally retained solutes. A number
of specific apoptotic death cascades involving downstream
signaling molecules have now been identified. Molecular
hallmarks of apoptosis include phosphatidylserine exposure (translocation from the inner leaflet to the outer
surface of the plasma membrane), activation of the cell
surface receptors such as Fas/CD95, a member of the
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of death receptors,65
mitochondrial release of cytochrome
activation of the
caspases, notably caspase-3,6‘and DNA

The Caspase Death Cascade
Caspases are a family of structurally related cysteine proteases that cleave target proteins just after an aspartate
residue.53Because caspases are constitutively expressed as
biologically inactive precursors or procaspases in most cells
and can cleave their own procaspases, the caspase cascade
is self-amplifying.
It had been thought that a key event (and “point of no
return”) in the execution of apoptosis was activation of the
essential “terminator” protein, caspase-3. However, two
recent studies provide compelling evidence that neurons
can survive in the face of caspase-3 activation.70“bIn global
ischemia, caspase-3 upregulation and activation occur 2 to
3 days before the onset of histologically detectable neuronal death.” The importance of early caspase-3 activation
to global ischemia-induced neuronal death is underscored
by the finding that Z-DEVD-FMK, a selective caspase-3
inhibitor, is neuroprotective if administered at the time of
ischemia but not at 24 hours or later.’2 Thus, neurons
become “committed’ to h e early in the postischemic
period. Caspase-3 promotes cell death through proteolytic cleavage of downstream target proteins such as poly
(ADP-ribose)polymerase (PARP), nuclear lamins, DNAdependent protein kinase, and the inhibitory subunit of
DNA fragmentation f a ~ t o r . ~DNA
~ . ’ ~fragmentation results
in cell disintegration followed by engulfment by surrounding cells. The caspase cascade can be activated by either of
two reversible and interacting pathways, an extrinsic or
death receptor-dependent route (Plate 42-3) and an
intrinsic (death receptor-independent) or mitochondrial
route (Plate 42-4).
In the extrinsic or death receptor-dependent pathway,
apoptotic stimuli trigger activation of death ligand-death
receptor systems such as the FasLFas (also known as the
Apo-1 or CD95) ~ystem.‘~
Fas is a death domain-containing receptor and member of the TNF superfamily of
cytoldne receptors. Forkheadl (FOXO-3A1 or FOXO-SA),
a member of the Forkhead family of transcription factors,
induces expression of target genes, such as the cytokine
FasL (Fas ligand), that are implicated in the extrinsic
receptor pathway of caspase activation.’6 FasL initiates
apoptosis by binding to its cognate receptor Fas, triggering formation of a death-inducing signaling complex
(DISC) within seconds of receptor engagement. Fas acts
via its death domain to recruit the adaptor protein FADD
(Fas-associated death domain). FADD, in turn, acts via its
death domain to recruit procaspase-8 into the DISC. The
signaling complex catalyzes the proteolytic cleavage and

transactivation of procaspase-8 to generate the “instigator”
caspase, caspase-8. Once activated, caspase-8 is released
from the DISC into the cytoplasm as a heterotetramer
composed of two small subunits and two large subunits.
Activated or processed caspase-8 can directly activate
other members of the caspase family, paving the way for
the execution phase of apoptosis. Caspase-8 additionally
acts to induce the translocation of Bcl-2 family member
BID to the mitochondria. When the abundance of BAX,
BIM, BAD and BID exceeds that of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2
family members, cytochrome c is released from the mitochondria (see Plate 42-3).
In the death receptor-independent or mitochondrial
route, apoptotic and necrotic death stimuli trigger the mitochondrial release of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm, an
event that -_
is blocked by Bcl-2 and its anti-apoptotic family
members. Once in the cytoplasm, cytochrome c assembles
with the apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (Apaf-1),
procaspase-9 and deoxy ATP to form a protein-signaling
complex termed the apoptosome. Formation of the apoptosome promotes transactivation of procaspase-9 by Apaf-1.
Activated caspase-9, in turn, cleaves procaspase-3 to generate the downstream “terminator” protein caspase-3. Thus,
the apoptosome enables cytochrome c to jump-start the
caspase self-amplifjmg cascade of proteolysis independently of ligand-activated death receptors (see Plate 4 2 4 ) .
Both focal ischemia and global ischemia trigger the
caspase death cascade in neurons destined to die. Global
ischemia induces activation of death receptors, such as
Fas“ and p75NTR,is81and terminators, such as caspase-9
and caspase-3,’‘ 80,82 and the onset of DNA fragmentation,
a marker for apoptotic cell death.’g~Ro~H3
The observation
that global ischemia trig ers early release of cytochrome c
from the mit~chondria,@~
activation of caspase-gS2.@
and
caspase-3,” ‘O and relatively late activation of Fas/FasL”
provides strong support for activation of the caspases via
an intrinsic pathway. In the case of focal ischemia, delayed
neuronal death with many of the hallmarks of apoptosis are
observed in the penumbra, including evidence of DNA
fragmentation,6ai0 activation of the Fas W a s receptor,65
release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria,fi6and activation of caspase-X6’
‘ I

Inhibitors of Apoptosis
The inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) are a family of
structurally related proteins that confer protection from
death-inducing stimuli by potently binding and inhibiting activated caspases. IAPs, originally identified in the
genome of baculovirus on the basis of their ability to suppress apoptosis in infected host cells, suppress apoptosis in
mammalian cells by halting the caspase death
To date, eight human IAPs have been identified, including
XIAP, c-IAP, c-IAP2, and survivin, and all exhibit antiapoptotic activity in cell culture. The best-characterized
IAP family member is the X-chromosome-linked protein
XIAP. XIAP is an extremely potent suppressor of apoptosis, an effect mediated at least in part by its ability to bind
and suppress active caspases. XIAP binds caspases -3, -7,
and -9 reversibly and with high affinity, thereby masking
the caspase active site. The main functional unit in the
IAPs is the BIR (or baculoviral IAP repeat) domain, which
contains about 80 amino acids folded around a zinc atom.

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

Most IAPs have multiple BIR domains that mediate
specialized functions. For example, the linker region between BIRl and BIR2 binds caspase-3 and caspase-7, BIR2
selectively targets caspase-7, and BIR3 targets caspase-9.
Under physiologic conditions, IAPs are present in
mammalian cells, where they act as buffers or dampeners
that suppress spurious spontaneous caspase activation.
The actions of IAPs on neuronal survival are, however, not
limited to caspase inhibition. Compelling data support
additional roles for IAPs in protein degradation, cell cycle
regulation and caspase-independent signaling cascades.86
Emerging data indicate that the presence of a zinc-binding
motif or RING domain at the distal end of the carboxytermini in a subset of IAPs confers protein degradation
activity.8hThese IAPs catalyze degradation of select target
proteins via ubiquitylation. In this process, IAPs catalyze
the sequential covalent addition of ubiquitin (a 76-amino
acid protein) onto select lysine residues within target proteins. The modified residues can form multimeric polyubiquitin chains, which tag the protein and mark it for
destruction.xh
Injurious stimuli such as global ischemia elevate the
expression of IAP proteins, which bind and reversibly
inhibit the caspases. At the same time, injurious stimuli
that are sufficiently potent promote the mitochondrial
release of Smac (second mitochondria-derived activator of
caspases)/DIABLO (direct IAP-binding protein with low
PI) and cytochrome c. Whereas cytochrome c directly activates Apaf-1 and caspase-9 and forms the apoptosome,
SmadDIABLO binds to IAP family members and neutralizes their anti-apoptotic activity. Smacoforms an elongated arch-shaped dimer more than 130 A in length. The
Smac dimer forms a stable complex with the BIR2 and
BIR3 domains of XIAP. Structural studes involving
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and X-ray analyses
reveal that the Smac N-terminal tripeptide (Ala-ValPro-Ile) recognizes a surface groove composed of highly
conserved residues on the BIR3 domain.*gThe balance
between the IAPs and SmadDIABLO establishes a
threshold for "lethal" caspase-3 activity. Only under conditions in which SmadDIABLO is released from the mitochondria is activated caspase-3 liberated from IAPs and
free to execute apoptotic cell death.
An alternative pathway to inhibit activated caspase-3 is
via the anti-apoptotic protein B ~ l - 2 Evidence
.~
indicates
that the mammalian cell-death inhibitors Bcl-2 and Bcl-x,,,
by analogy to the Caenorhabditis elegans cell-death inhibitor CED-9, might function as a pseudosubstrate inhibitor
of activated caspase-3.g1Studies of programmed cell death
in C. elegans indicate that the CED-9 protein prevents
apoptosis by direct inhibition of CED-3. CED-9 can be
cleaved by CED-3 at two sites near its amino-terminus,
at least one of which is important for complete protection
by CED-9 against cell death. Ischemic preconditioning
induces expression of Bcl-2 in CA1 neurons.gzThere is as
yet no hard evidence, however, that mammahan Bcl-2
functions as an active site-directed inhibitor of caspase-3.
Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase-1and
Apoptosis-Inducing Factor
Poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase-1(PARP-1) is an abundant
nuclear enzyme involved in DNA damage surveillance and

835

DNA repair and is a critical downstream target of caspase3. Under physiologic condtions, PARP-1 is critical for
maintaining genomic integrity and may play a role in DNA
replication and regulation of gene expre~sion.'~
PARP acts
via an amino-terminal DNA-binding motif to recognize
nicks and breaks in the double-stranded nucleic acid.
Upon binding to DNA strand breaks, PARP catalyzes the
polyribosylation of P-nicotinamide adenine dmucleotide
(NAD'), generating branched polymers of ADP-ribose
that it transfers to a subset of nuclear proteins, including
histones, topoisomerases I and 11, DNA polymerases, and
The obligatory triggers of PARP-1 activaPARP
tion are nicks and breaks in double-stranded DNA. Once
activated, PARP-1 transfers between 50 and 200 molecules
of ADP-ribose to target proteins, which may activate or
inhibit their function. In the case of histones, poly(ADPribosy1)ation promotes chromatin relaxation.
Neuronal insults and other types of environmental stress
effect the production of free radicals and oxidants. These
agents induce DNA damage, which frequently triggers cell
death by apoptosis. Apoptosis culminates in activation of
caspase-3, which catalyzes the cleavage and activation of
downstream targets including PARP-1. A major trigger
for DNA damage in cerebral ischemia is peroxynitrite
(ONOO-), a cytotoxic oxidant formed by reaction between
nitric oxide and superoxide (see Plate 4 2 4 ) . Excessive
activation of PARP-1 depletes the entire cell of its substrate NAD' (Plate 42-5B). NAD' depletion in mitochondria causes pronounced slowing of glycolysis, electron
transport, and ATP formation, leading to energy failure
and neuronal death. Observations that PARP-1 inhibition
or gene inactivation may prevent the neuronal death associated with cerebral i s ~ h e m i a myocarhal
~ ' ~ ~ ~ infarction,"
inflammatory injury, reactive oxyqn species-induced
injury,g6and glutamate excitotoxicity' ) '01 have triggered an
explosion of interest in the process of poly(ADPribosy1)ation.
Our understanding of the underpinnings of PARP-1induced cell death was significantly advanced by the discovery that massive PARP-1 activation triggers apoptotic
cell death mediated b a o tosis-inducing factor (AIF)
(see Plate 42-5A).'0"'0rA~F 7s a powerful cytotoxin that
under normal conditions is confined to the mitochondrion
together with cytochrome c and other pro-apoptotic molecules. Massive activation of PARP-1 promotes production
of poly(ADP-ribose) and depletion of NAD', which appear
to signal the release of AIF from the mito~hondria.'~~
Once
released, AIF rapidly translocates to the cytoplasm and
nucleus. Nuclear AIF promotes chromatin condensation,
chromatin fragmentation, and, ultimately, apoptotic cell
death via a caspase-independent pathway. Cytosolic AIF
acts on the mitochondria to collapse the mitochondrial
membrane potential and initiate the release cytochrome c,
which activates caspase-3. However, caspase activation is
apparently not required for PARP-l-initiated cell death,
because caspase inhibitors do not afford protection.103
Thus, PARP-1 activation is required for AIF translocation
during cell death and AIF is essential for PARP-l-mediated cell death. Moreover, AIF-mediated cell death is
caspase-independent .
Important unanswered questions are: Does NAD'
depletion play a role in AIF release? Is the first step in

836

Stroke: Patbopbysiology,Diagnosis, and Management

bidirectional signaling between the nucleus and mitochondria mediated by poly(ADP-ribosy1)ated molecules?
and How does block of AIF afford protection in the presence of caspase-3 activation?

TRIGGERS OF ISCHEMIC
CELL DEATH
Glutamate Excitotoxicity

mate transporters in astrocytes, contributing to the rise in
extracellular glutamate. Glutamate toxicity induces reverse
operation of the Na+-Ca" exchanger in neurons and astrocytes, exacerbating the buildup of Ca2+.'"*''5 During global
ischemia, extracellular glutamate rises from about 0.6 pM
to between 1 and 2 ~ M . l During
'~
focal ischemia, glutamate rises to between 16 and 30pM in the ~ o r e . ' ~ ' JA' ~
major consequence of the rise in extracellular glutamate is
activation not only of synaptic but also of extrasynaptic
ionotropic glutamate receptors (AMPARs, NMDARs, and
kainate receptors), with consequent influx of toxic Ca2+and
shutoff of the CREB-initiated program of cell survival (see
later).

Excitotoxicity refers to the ability of glutamate (and other
excitatory amino acids) to destroy neurons by excessive
activation of excitatory amino acid receptors. lo4Knowledge
that glutamate is potentially toxic dates to observations by
NMDA Receptors
Lucas and N e w h o u ~ e nearly
' ~ ~ a half century ago that gluFor nearly two decades, intense interest focused on
tamate administered to animals in vivo caused death of
NMDARs as the candidate mediator of Ca2+entry into
retinal neurons. The concept of excitotoxic death was signeurons destined to die."' NMDARs mediate the influx
nificantly advanced by Olney and Ho,'06 who used ultraof toxic Ca2+in a number of neurologic disorders, insults,
structural analysis to analyze the cytopathology of neurons
and neurodegenerative diseases. Although it is well esexposed to glutamate. These studies revealed a charactertablished that NMDARs are a critical player in focal
istic pattern of glutamate-induced neuronal death in which
ischemia-induced neuronal death, AMPARs appear to
postsynaptic structures such as dendrites and somata were
medlate the cell death associated with global ischemia.
destroyed but axons, presynaptic terminals, and nonneural
Although not completely understood, the following two
cells survived. Other excitatory amino acids and glutamate
analogues induced neuronal death with a rank order of
factors are thought to reduce the contribution of NMDARs
potency similar to that for their ability to elicit excitatory
in postischemic neurons: (1)the rise in extracellular acidity,
transmission. With the advent of selective excitatory amino
which inhibits NMDAR functional activity, and ( 2 )the rise
acid receptor antagonists in the 1980s and their applicain extracellular Zn", which potentiates currents mediated
by AMPARs and inhibits those medated by NMDARs.
tion to studies of glutamate actions, excitatory amino acids
were accepted as the major excitatory transmitters of the
Injurious stimuli, including hypoxia and transient ischecentral nervous system (CNS) and, in high concentrations,
mia, cause excessive activation of NMDARs, excesas excitotoxins, capable of excessive activation of excitatory
sive Ca2+influx, and excitotoxic cell death. Activation of
amino acid receptors and excitotoxic cell death.
NMDARs leads to neuronal death via nitric oxide (NO)
The concept that glutamate plays a critical role in the
signaling. NO is implicated as an important downstream
pathogenesis of global and focal ischemia origmated
mediator of NMDAR-induced excitotoxicity in postwith observations that raising extracellular magnesium
ischemic neurons. At excitatory synapses, neuronal NO
markedly reduced the vulnerability of cultured hippocamsynthase (nNOS) is physically anchored to the NMDAR
pal neurons to anoxia'07,'0sand that glutamate antagonists
through the scaffolding protein postsynaptic density
reduced neuronal injury in both in vitro and in vivo models
protein of 95kDa (PSD-95). NMDARs provide a direct
route for entry of Ca2+into the cell; once in the cell, Ca2+
of ischemia.'Og~'10
Over the past 15 to 20 years, accumulatbinds calmodulin and rapidly activates nNOS. Upon stiming evidence has mounted that glutamate antagonists
afford neuroprotection in global and focal ischemia. It is
ulation, nNOS converts arginine to NO and citrulline.
now widely accepted that excitotoxicity plays a critical role
Overproduction of NO from excessive or inappropriate
stimulation of nNOS is thought to mediate a major comin the neuronal death associated with these and many
other neuronal insults and disorders.'"
ponent of excitotoxic damage and focal ischemic cell death.
During the ischemic episode, anoxic depolarization trigUnder conditions of excessive glutamate release, activagers the massive release of synaptic glutamate."' Synaptition of NMDARs further contributes to neuronal death via
cally released glutamate activates the ionotropic glutamate
shutoff of the CREB-initiated program of gene expression.
receptors, ~-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-propionic
Under physiologic conditions, restricted Ca2+ influx via
acid receptors (AMPARs) and kainate receptors, which
synaptic NMDARs activates CREB. CREB activates
mediate the influx of Na' and thus further depolarize the
prosurvival target genes such as the neurotrophin brainpostsynaptic membrane, and N-methyl-D-aspartate recepderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Ca" influx via
tors (NMDARs) and GluR2-lacking AMPARs, which disynaptic NMDARs activates Ca"-calmodulin-dependent
rectly flux Ca2+and Na' into postsynaptic cell^.'^"^ Glutamate
kinase IV (CaMKIV) and downstream kinases, which act
also activates group I metabotropic glutamate receptors
in a coordinated manner to induce robust, sustained phos(mGluRs). Group I mGluRs, consisting of mGluRl and
phorylation of Ser133 and activation of CREB.120J21In
mGluR5, act via phospholipase C and inositol 1,4,5addition, CaMKIV phosphorylates and activates the cotriphosphate (InsP,) to trigger release of Ca2+from intraadaptor protein CREB-binding protein (CBP) at Ser301.
cellular store^."^ The massive rise in cytosolic Ca2+causes
Upon activation, CREB recruits phosphorylated CBP to
cells to further depolarize and become inexcitable. Anoxic
the promoter region of target genes, and the coactivator
depolarization also drives the reverse operation of glutacomplex induces gene transcription.

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

Findngs reported by Hardingham and colleagues""
reveal that the location of Ca2+entry into cells critically
influences the fate of neurons. Whereas Ca2+influx via
synaptic NMDARs induces activation of CREB, Caz+
influx via extrasynaptic NMDARs elicits dephosphorylation and inactivation of CREB.'='% Interestingly, contemporaneous activation of synaptic and extrasynaptic
NMDARs by bath-applied NMDA also shuts off CREB,
suggesting that extrasynaptic NMDARs act via a dominant,
cell-death signal to override the CREB-promoting effects
of synaptic NMDARs, L-type calcium channels and
protein kinase A (PKA), or both.122Ca2+influx via extrasynaptic NMDARs (and CREB shutdown) causes breakdown of the mitochondrial membrane potential, ATP
depletion, and necrotic cell death. Thus, the cellular
penalty of excess Ca" entry through extrasynaptic
NMDARs is not only dysfunction of CREB signaling but
also neuronal death.
The link between extrasynaptic NMDARs and mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal death is particularly
relevant to the pathophysiology of ischemia. Injurious
stimuli such as focal ischemia and global ischemia cause
excessive glutamate release and spillover; high extracellular glutamate stimulates extrasynaptic NMDARs, leading
ultimately to cell injury or death. This model would explain
severe, necrotic cell death in the ischemic core. Neurons
experiencing shorter, less severe hypoxic-ischemic episodes or neurons in the penumbra may suffer only a transient and incomplete depolarization of the mitochondria.
Their health could be compromised because of stimulation
of extrasynaptic NMDARs. This model is consistent with
findings of CREB shutoff and apoptosis in cells in the
penumbra. Stroke-surviving neurons have sustained concentrations of CREB and elevated concentrations of BDNF.
An additional link between NMDARs and mitochondrial dysfunction has emerged. Mounting evidence suggests that efflux of K' leads to reduced intracellular K'
concentrations and may be a critical driver of apoptosis.55
NMDARs are an important route of K' efflux in cells
undergoing apoptosis. Whereas NMDAR-mediated necrosis primarily involves influx of Na' and Ca", NMDARmehated apoptosis primarily involves efflux of K+.'=
Under normal conditions, excessive activation of NMDARs
in cultured cortical neurons triggers necrotic cell death,
characterized by prominent, acute swelling of cell bodies,
little or no DNA laddering, and insensitivity to protein synthesis inhibitors. In contrast, under conditions of reduced
extracellular Na' and Ca2+,activation of NMDARs in the
same cells induces apoptotic cell death, characterized by
cell shrinkage, nuclear condensation, intemucleosomal
fragmentation, and sensitivity to protein synthesis
inhibitors. The last is particularly relevant in the presence
of low extracellular Na' and Ca2+,as is observed after brain
ischemia in v i ~ o . ~ ~

Calcium-Permeable AMPA Receptors
AMPARs mediate fast synaptic transmission at excitatory
synapses and play important roles in synaptic remodeling,
activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, and excitotoxic cell
death. The GluR2 subunit govems the biophysical pro
erties of AMPARs, including Ca2+ permeability, 126,g;

837

voltage-dependent block by intracellular polyamines, single
channel conductance, and activity-de endent AMPAR
recycling and targeting to the synapse." Thus, an acute
change in the level of GluR2 expression would be expected
to have profound effects on synaptic activity and neuronal
survival. The relative expression of GluR2 in neurons is not
static but is regulated in a cell-specific manner during
development and is remodeled by activity, anti-psychotics,
drugs of abuse and corticosteroids, and after seizures"" '"'
or ischemic in~u1t.l~'
Considerable evidence implicates Glum-lacking AM PARS
in the neuronal death associated with global ischemia.'"
AMPAR antagonists, but not NMDAR antagonists, protect
against global ischemia-induced cell death, even when
administered hours after the ischemic insult.'3L1wGluR2lacking AMPARs are an important route of Ca2+and Zn2+
entry into insulted n e ~ r 0 n s . lIn
~ ~adult brain, principal
neurons of the hippocampus express high levels of GhR2
and exhibit relatively low Ca2+influx via AMPARs. Injurious stimuli such as global ischemia, severe limbic seizures,
and spinal cord injury trigger suppression of GluR2 messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression in vulnerable CA1 neurons in a subunit-specific and cell-specific
manner before onset of cell death (Plate 42-6). In hippocampal slices, CA1 neurons with robust action potentials exhibit greatly enhanced AMPA-elicited Ca" rises
before onset of cell death.'j6 Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) at Schaffer collateral-CAl synapses exhibit
an enhanced Ca2+-dependent component that may be
mediated by GluR2-lacking AMPARs and marked inward
rectification at late times after ischernia.lw"These findings
suggest an important role for GluR2-lacking AMPARs in
ischemia-induced neuronal death. Consistent with this
concept, acute gene suppression of GluR2 by in vivo
administration of antisense oligonucleotides, even in the
absence of an ischemic insult, causes selective death of
pyramidal neurons.13i A number of these events are replicated in in vitro models of hypoxia-ischemia. In hippocampal neurons, OGD triggers downregulation of GluR2
mRNA expression and a rise in intracellular Ca2+that is
blocked by l-naphthyl acetyl spermine (Naspm, a channel
blocker selective for GluR2-lacking AM PARS).'^^

Kainate Receptors
Although little attention has focused on the role of kainatetype glutamate receptors in global ischemia-induced neuronal death, one study provides convincing evidence that
these receptors are also critical players. The kainateselective drug decahydroisoquinoline LY377770 (a novel,
soluble, systemically active Glu5 antagonist) affords robust
protection against global ischemia-induced and focal
ischemia-induced cell death, even when administered
after o c c l ~ s i o n . A
' ~ mechanism
~
by which LY377770 may
contribute to neuronal survival is by preventing glutamate
release in focal ischemia. These findings suggest that
kainate receptors play a central role in ischemic brain
damage. Because NMDAR antagonists have a number of
side effects, includmg psychotomimetic effects in humans,
increased glucose utilization, and morphologic changes in
the rat cingulate cortex, non-NMDAR antagonists may be
better candidates for clinical use.

838

Calcium

Stroke: Patbopbysiolofly, Diaflnosis, and ManaJement

include the cysteine proteases, such as caspase-3,14' and
endonucleases such as NUC18.14'

The universal second messenger Ca" is a neuronal signaling molecule and critical player in ischemia-induced
Zinc
neuronal death. During the ischemic episode, CA1 pyraThe transition metal Zn", like Caz+,is a neuronal signalmidal cells depolarize. Depolarization activates voltageing molecule and critical player in ischemic cell death.15'
sensitive Ca2+channels, which flux Ca" into the interior of
Zn2+is present in cells throughout the body and serves as
cells, and triggers a massive release of synaptic glutamate.
a tightly bound, functionally important component of
Synaptically released glutamate activates AMPARs and
many metalloenzymes and transcription factors. Free,
kainate receptors, which further depolarize the postsychelatable Zn2+is present at high concentrations in the
naptic membrane, and NMDARs and GluR2-lacking
presynaptic terminals of a subset of glutamatergic neurons
AMPARs, which directly flux Ca2+ (as well as Na') into
and is particularly abundant in presynaptic vesicles. Zn2+is
postsynaptic ce11s.112~113
Glutamate also activates group I
colocalized with glutamate in a subset of vesicles in the
mGluRs. As already mentioned, group I mGluRs (mGluR1
presynaptic terminals of excitatory synapses of the neoand mGluR5) act via phospholipase C and InsP, to trigger
cortex layers I through 111 and V, hippocampus, subiculum,
release of Ca" from intracellular s t o r e ~ . "The
~ massive rise
amygdala, thalamus, and striatum. Zn2+ is particularly
in cytosolic Ca2+causes cells to further depolarize and
abundant in vesicles at mossy fiber synapses of the hilar
become inexcitable. Glutamate toxicity induces reverse
and CA3 region of the hippocampus (Plate 42-7A). Zn2+is
operation of the Na+-Caz+exchanger, exacerbating the
loaded into synaptic vesicles via a high-affinity transporter,
buildup of Ca2+.'"."5 At the same time, energy-dependent
Zn2+transporter-3 (ZnT-3), which is highly expressed in
processes, such as presynaptic uptake of excitatory amino
hippocampus and cortex.'51Zn2+is released from nerve teracids, are impeded, further contributing to the rise of gluminals in response to synaptic activity'5z or by exposure to
tamate in the extracellular space. Extracellular Ca2+ is
high K' or kainate.lS3-55 Upon release from presynaptic
depleted to less than 90% of its physiologic concentration. After reperfusion, Ca2+homeostasis is restored; cells
terminals, Zn2+ modulates the functional activity of
appear morphologically normal, exhibit normal intracelluexcitatory and inhibitory amino acid receptors, including
lar Caz+,and regain the ability to generate action potenNMDARs, AMPARs and gamma-aminobutync acid A
(GABA,) receptors. Whereas Znz+blocks currents meditials for 24 to 72 hours after the insult. Ultimately, ambient
glutamate elicits a late rise in intracellular Caz+and Znz+ ated by NMDARs and GABAA receptors, it potentiates
and death of CA1 neurons ensues, exhibiting hallmarks of
currents mediated by AMPARS.'"
apoptosis and necrosis.
The notion that Zd', like glutamate, might be neurotoxic
Neuronal homeostasis requires that the intracellular
emerged from findings that perforant path stimulation
concentration of Ca2+be maintained in the range of 50 to
releases Zn2' and that Zn2' damages postsynaptic target
300 nM (or about four times lower than that of extracelhilar interneurons and CA3 pyramidal cells both in
lular Ca2+)."' The massive rise in intracellular Ca2+during
~v015fi.157 and in vitr~.'~'
Exposure of cortical neurons in
the ischemic episode initiates a series of cytoplasmic and
culture to 300 pM Zn2+for 15 minutes or to 1mM Zn2+for
nuclear events that impairs cellular activity and damages
5 minutes kills virtually all neurons. Moreover, vulnerabiltissue profoundly. High cytosolic Ca2+ activates Ca"ity to Zn2+is substantially enhanced by concurrent memATPase, which depletes the energy stores of the cell, and
brane depolarization. Studies also show that Zn2+ is a
uncouples mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, which
critical mediator of neuronal death associated with global
causes acute swelling of dendrites and cell bodies and
ischemic insult^'^' and prolonged seizures.l6OAt late times
subsequent cell death. Additionally, high Ca2+ activates
after global ischemia (48 to 72 hours) or after status epiCa2+-sensitivetranscription factors, phospholipases, endolepticus (16 to 24 hours), Znz+ accumulates in degenernucleases, and proteases.'" Proteases destroy cytoskeletal
ating hilar and selectively vulnerable hippocampal neurons
proteins such as actin and ~pectrin'~'as well as extracellu(see Plate 42-7). Studies with Zn2+indicator dyes show
lar matrix proteins such as laminin.l4' High cytosolic Ca2+ that toxic levels of Zn2+may reach as high as 0.5 pM. Chanalso causes a derangement in signaling. A notable example
nels that mediate this Zn2+influx into CA1 neurons include
is excessive activation of nitric oxide synthase, which provoltage-sensitive Caz+ channels, the Na+-Zn2+antiporter
motes generation of free radicals. Free radicals destroy cell
(exchanger), N MDARs, and GluR2-lacking AMPARs .I5'
membranes by inhibition of critical membrane roteins,
Administration of the membrane-impermeant Zn2+chelainitiation of lipid peroxidation (see later),' 15~'42-14pdamage tor ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) substantially
of DNA, and induction of a p ~ p t o s i s . ' ' ~ ~ ' ~ ~
reduces the rise in intracellular Zn2+ in CA1 and hilar
More severe insults elicit massive elevations in cytosolic
neurons and affords robust neuroprote~tion.'~~
These
Ca" and necrotic cell death,115and milder insults elicit less
observations implicate Zn2+as a critical mediator of the
dramatic elevations in Ca2+and may trigger a p o p t o ~ i s . ' ~ ~neuronal death associated with global ischemia. UnreThe "calcium set-point hypothesis" posits that whereas
solved issues are (1)the pattern of global ischemia-induced
substantial elevations in cytosolic Ca2+inhibit apopto~is,'~' neuronal death does not parallel the distribution of synlowering of cytosolic Caz+as, for example, by block or inacaptic Zn2+ and (2) Zn2+translocation precedes neuronal
tivation of voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels, can induce
death in rodents (and probably humans) by 48 to 72
apoptosis in otherwise healthy cells. Modest elevations in
hours.
Ca2+during the reperfusion period are implicated in the
Mechanisms by which Zn2+ induces neurotoxicity
execution of apoptosis; possible targets of a late rise in Ca2+ include production of free radicals, disruption of inito-

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Iscbemia-Induced Neuronal Death

chondrial function, including dsruption of glycolysis and
energy production and inhibition of respiration, and potentiation of AMPAR-mediated currents.135The ability of Zn"
to shift excitotoxic injury from NMDAR-medated injury
and toward AMPAR-mediated injury is illustrated by preferential death of neurons with high NADPH (nicotinamide
adenine dmucleotide phosphate, reduced form) diaphorase. These neurons exhibit resistance to NMDA toxicity
and high susceptibility to AMPA toxicity,'" consistent with
the presence of GluR2-lacking AM PARS."^ Ultimately,
Zn'+ induces apoptotic cell death, necrotic cell death, or
both, depending on the intensity of exposure. Zn" may
also play a role in the cell death associated with focal
ischemia.

MECHANISMS OF ISCHEMIC
CELL DEATH
Metabolic Stress
A hallmark of cells undergoing ischemia is energy depletion with altered energy dynamics. Neurons and glia have
relatively high consumptions of oxygen and glucose and
depend almost exclusivelyon oxidative phosphorylation for
energy production. During the ischemic episode, impairment of cerebral blood flow restricts the delivery of substrates, particularly oxygen and glucose, and im airs the
energetics required to maintain ionic gradients! Anoxic
depolarization triggers the release of synaptic glutamate,
which acts via ionotropic and metabotropic receptors to
induce a massive rise in cytosolic Ca2+(see previous discussion) and a resultant loss of extracellular Ca2+.'63
At the
same time, energy-dependent processes, such as presynaptic uptake of excitatory amino acids, are impeded,
further contributing to the rise of glutamate in the extracellular space. Glutamate toxicity induces reverse operation of the Na+-Ca2+exchanger, exacerbating the buildup
of Ca"'.'04~"sNa' and Caz+influx drives a massive efflux of
K', which flows out of neurons via NMDARs, leading to a
rise in extracellular K'.'".'"
In global ischemia, ATP is depleted in cells throughout
the brain essentially immedately but recovers to near
physiologic levels by the time of r e p e r f u ~ i o n . "Low
~ ~ ~ATP
levels encourage cells to die by necrosis by inducing depolarization of neurons, leading to synaptic release of glutamate from neurons and reverse operation of glutamate
transporters in astrocytes, swelling of cells (edema), and
rupture of the plasma membrane.'66 Because ATP is
required for formation of the apoptosome that activates
the caspase death cascade, ATP depletion prevents caspase
activation and shifts the balance of death cascades in favor
of necrosis. Nevertheless, insults such as global ischemia
ultimately induce apoptosis. Apoptosis culminates in activation of caspase-3, which catalyzes the cleavage and activation of downstream targets, including PARP-1. Excessive
PARP-1 activation depletes the entire cell of its substrate
NAD'. NAD' depletion in mitochondria causes pronounced slowing of glycolysis, electron transport, and ATP
formation, resulting in further energy failure and cell
demise.
Focal ischemia elicits different patterns of metabolic
changes in the core and penumbra. Within 1to 3 minutes,

839

cells in the core exhibit a dramatic decline in ATPg4,gs
as
well as anoxic depolarization, which triggers release of
synaptic glutamate. Na' enters neurons via NMDARs,
AMPARs, and other channels permeable to monovalent
ions. K' flows out of cells via NMDARs. Water follows passively, driven by the influx of Na' and C1-, which greatly
exceeds the efflux of K'. At the same time, as cells lose
energy, energy-requiring pumps that normally force ions
into and out of the cell in an attempt to maintain a concentration gradient either fail or operate in reverse. These
factors induce a rise in extracellular K+'64,'65and a reduction in extracellular Ca2+.163,16i
By 2 hours after temporary
focal ischemia, extracellular K' is restored to a physiologic
concentration.lM The ensuing edema negatively affects
perfusion of cells in the penumbra and affects more
remote regions via long-range changes, including intracranial pressure, vascular compression, and herniation.
In contrast, cells in the penumbra experience a decline
in energyg4but do not exhibit anoxic depolarization or a
rise in extracellular K+.g4.95
In these cells, low ATP promotes necrosis by inducing failure or reverse operation of
ion pumps, swelling of cells, and rupture of the plasma
membrane.'& ATP depletion inhibits formation of the
apoptosome and tends to oppose caspase activation and the
onset of apoptotic cell death. Nevertheless, apoptosis
ensues in the penumbra. As in global ischemia, activated
caspase-3 activates PARP-1, leading to NAD' depletion
and further energy failure.

Mitochondrial Demise
Mitochondria house not only proteins involved in oxidative
phosphorylation, but also pro-apoptotic proteins, includmg
cytochrome c. Under physiologic conditions, cytochrome
c is localized to the outer compartment of the mitochondria, where it serves as an electron carrier and participates
in oxidative phosphorylation. Apoptotic (and necrotic)
stimuli such as global ischemia disrupt the integrity of the
outer mitochondrial membrane and cause the release of
cytochrome c (see Plate 4 2 4 ) . Upon release into the cytoplasm, cytochrome c forms the apoptosome (in a deoxyATP-medated reaction), the signaling complex required
for activation of caspase-9. Although the precise mechanisms by which the integrity of mitochondrial membrane
breaks down are unknown, Bcl-2 family members are
For example, addition of
known to play a critical
pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members to purified mitochondria is sufficient to induce release of cytochrome c, and
overexpression of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members is
sufficient to prevent it.
Many of the Bcl-2 family members are anchored in the
outer membranes of mitochondria but oriented toward the
cytosol. BAD, a pro-apoptotic member of this family, can
heterodimerize with anti-apoptotic family members Bcl-2
and Bcl-x, to initiate apoptosis. Injurious stimuli such
as global ischemia induce sustained high cytoplasmic
Ca2+, which triggers activation of the serine-threonine
phosphatase calcineurin.16' Upon activation, calcineurin
dephosphorylates BAD, promoting its release from cytosolic retention factor 14-3-3 and its translocation to the
mitochondria, where it heterodmerizes with Bcl-x, and
initiates a p o p t o ~ i s . Both
' ~ ~ apoptotic and necrotic stimuli

3
%

3
%

$

Stroke: PatbopbysioloJy, Diagnosis, and Management

840

are thought to converge upon Ca'+-dependent destabilization of the mitochondrial membrane.16sIn contrast, growth
factors and other pro-survival agents promote phos horylation of BAD, impairing its binding to Bcl-x, an8abrogating its pro-apoptotic effect in cells. Ca2+-dependent
activation of calcineurin and dephosphorylation of BAD
are thought to be critical to the change in mitochondrial
membrane permeability and demise of mito~hondria.'~~
How do Bcl-2 family members cause disruption of the
outer mitochondrial membrane? One hypothesis is that
Bcl-x,, which is structurally similar to the pore-forming
subunit of di htheria toxin, might act by inserting into the
outer mitoc ondrial membrane, where Bcl-2 family
members could form channels or even large holes.'68 It is
known that Bcl-2 family members insert into synthetic
lipid bilayers, oligomerize, and form channels with discrete
conductances. It is not clear, however, whether the holes
are sufficiently large as to allow large proteins such as
cytochrome c to pass through. In a second model, Bcl-2
family members would recruit other outer mitochondrial
membrane proteins, such as voltage-dependent anion
channel (VDAC), into forming a large ore channel. Such
recruitment would likely involve a su stantial conformational change in VDAC, which normally is permeable to
much smaller molecules.

!i

f

Nitric Oxide
The reactive gas NO is a diffusible signaling molecule
present throughout cells of the body. In neurons, NO acts
as an "aberrant transmitter," in that it is a small signaling
molecule released by one cell that acts on another cell but
is not released from vesicles and does not act via a classic
membrane r e ~ e p t o r . ' ~NO
~ . ' ~is~synthesized by nitric oxide
synthetase nNOS, an enzyme that converts arginine to NO
and citrulline. At excitatory synapses, nNOS is hysically
anchored to NMDARs in the postsynaptic mem rane via
PSD-95 (also known as synapse-associated protein-90,
SAP-90). Activation of NMDARs triggers a rise in postsynaptic Ca2+;intracellular Ca2+binds calmodulin and rapidly
activates nNOS, which synthesizes N0.'71,'7z Thus, NO is
an im ortant downstream mediator of NMDARs and is
critic to many forms of neuronal signaling and synaptic
plasticity. Neuronal NOS is expressed in a small population
of neurons throughout the CNS, with high densities in the
accessory olfactory bulb and granule cells of the cerebellum.
NO is also implicated as an important downstream
mediator of NMDA-induced excitotoxicity (see previous
discussion). Injurious stimuli such as global and focal
ischemia cause excessive stimulation of NMDARs and
production of NO.'73 Some studies implicate the free
in the
radical form of NO and the superoxide anion ( .02-)
oxidative damage of cellular DNA, lipid peroxidation (see
later), and excitotoxic cell death.'74 NO reacts with the
superoxide anion to form peroxynitrite, a cytotoxic oxidant
that induces DNA damage (see Plate 42-4). DNA damage
is a trigger of apoptotic cell death. Apoptosis culminates in
activation of caspase-3, which catalyzes the cleavage and
activation of downstream targets, including PARP-1. In addition to DNA damage, peroxynitrite contributes to cellular
damage by several other mechanisms. It can nitrosylate
cysteine residues in target proteins such as the NMDAR

\

ap

and impair NMDAR-mediated synaptic transmission.
Peroxynitrite oxidizes and destroys other critical neuronal
proteins, such as mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase
complex,'7sand reacts with unsaturated fatty acids in membranes to initiate lipid peroxidation (see later).
NO contributes to cell damage via several additional
mechanisms. It interferes with superoxide dismutase,
thereby reducing its antioxidant action, and complexes
with non-heme iron present in the form of iron-sulfur clusters within enzymes critical to DNA re lication and mitochondrial energy roduction. NO is t ought to damage
DNA by diffusing rom the mitochondria and cytoplasm to
the nucleus, where it is cleaved to form hydroxyl radicals
or singlet oxygen. Important evidence that NO is a critical
mediator of neuronal death comes from studies that show
that mice that either have a knockout of nNOS or have
been treated with 7-nitroindazole, an inhibitor of nNOS,
are protected a ainst neuronal death in experimental
models of stroke.976

E

P

Free Radicals and Lipid Peroxidation
Neuronal insults and other types of environmental stress
induce the formation of free radicals such as the superoxide anion, hydroxyl radical, singlet oxygen, radical nitric
oxide, and oxidants such as peroxynitrite. These agents, collectively termed reactive oxygen species (ROS), are implicated as critical mediators of neuronal injury.174J77J78
NMDAR-mediated Caz+ influx promotes production of
free radicals b stimulation of NO, which reacts with superto form peroxynitrite (see earlier
oxide free ra 'cal (.02-)
discussion). NMDAR-mediated influx of Caz+also activates
phospholipase A,. Phospholi ase A, liberates arachidonic
acid, an unsaturated fatty acirf and promotes production of
free radicals via activation of the lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase pathways."' Cyclooxygenase catalyzes the addition
of two molecules of 0, to arachidonic acid to produce
prostaglandin PGG2,which is rapidly peroxidized to PGHz
with concomitant release of superoxide anion.'" Metabolism of free arachidonic acid is thought to be a major
source of superoxide anion. Zn2+influx via GluR2-lacking
AMPARs also promotes roduction of free radicals, such as
mitochondrial superoxi e, in injured neurons.l8*
Short exposure (10 to 90 minutes) to free radicals
damages protein, lipids, and nucleic acids. In neurons, free
radicals inactivate and damage critical membrane proteins
such as Na' and Ca2+pumps, creatine kinase and mitochondrial dehydrogenases, and promote oxidation of the
Na+-K+-ATPase exchanger, rendering it susceptible to
calpain-mediated proteolysis.'82Free radicals damage proteins by oxidation of side chains and modification of disulfide bonds. Free radicals also inactivate and damage
nucleic acids. Free radicals effect oxidative damage by
causing single- and double-stranded breaks in DNA, chemically modifying nucleic acid bases, breaking the glycosylic
bond between ribose and individual bases and crosslinking
of protein to DNA strand^."^ If not repaired, such oxidative lesions msrupt nucleic acid elongation, alter the coding
of DNA, or both, thus impairing DNA replication and transcription and contributing to the demise of cells.1R3
Free radicals also oxidize and damage unsaturated fatty
acids. Lipid peroxidation, the oxidative deterioration of

2

(P

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

membrane unsaturated fatty acids, is caused by reaction
of free radicals with unsaturated bonds in the side chains
of polyunsaturated fatty acids.'s4,'ssThese reactions spark a
chain reaction leading to formation of peroxides, hydroperoxides, and aldehydes. Although superoxide anion is not
itself a potent oxidizer, it promotes oxidation of ferric ion
and release of ferrous iron from ferritin.'*6In the presence
of transition metals such as copper and ferrous iron, these
chain reactions can expand geometrically. Glial cells in the
brain have abundant stores of oxidized iron,ls7 mostly in
the form of ferritin and tran~ferrin."~Ultrastructural
studies show that excessive generation of oxygen radicals,
followed by lipid peroxidation, accelerates the structural
damage of neurons.188Lipid peroxidation compromises the
integrity of the neuronal plasma membrane by altering
membrane permeability and fluidity and allowing ions such
as Ca2+to leak into the cell. Disruption of the membrane
compromises the function of receptors, channels, transporters, and ion exchangers, adding further to the demise
of injured cells. Specific populations of neurons are
thought to be especially vulnerable to free radical-induced
damage during reperfusion, either because they are deficient in glutathione peroxidase or because they are surrounded by iron-laden supporting cells that release iron
during and after ischemia.

841

Raslmitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway,
which phosphorylates and activates the MAPK-activated
kinases, the pp90 ribosomal S6 kinase (Rsk) family members. Rsks regulate gene expression by phosphorylating
transcription factors such as CREB. These kinases act in a
coordinated manner to induce robust, sustained phosphorylation of Ser133 and activation of CREB.I2",l2lWhereas
CaMKIV mediates the early phase of Ser133 phosphorylation, the MAPK pathway mediates prolonged Ser133
pho~phorylation.'~~
In addition, CaMKIV phosphorylates
and activates the coadaptor protein CBP at Ser301. Upon
activation, CREB recruits phosphorylated CBP to the promoters of CREB target genes, and the coactivator complex
induces gene transcription. Considerable evidence indicates that phosphorylation of Ser142 and Ser143 also contributes to CREB activation, but inhibits the interaction of
CREB with CBP.IS2
Although influx of Ca2+via synaptic NMDARs induces
activation of CREB and neuronal survival, influx of Ca2+
via extrasynaptic NMDARs elicits CREB shutoff.'22-'2A
At
extrasynaptic sites, Ca2+ influx via NMDARs activates
protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and PP2A, which dephosphorylate and inactivate CREB. Interestingly, contemporaneous activation of synaptic and extrasynaptic NMDARs
by bath-applied NMDA also shuts off CREB, suggesting
that extrasynaptic NMDARs act via a dominant cell-death
signal. Ca" influx via extrasynaptic NMDARs (and CREB
Transcription Factors
shutdown) causes mitochondrial dysfunction, ATP depleInjurious stimuli such as ischemia trigger a number of trantion, and neuronal death.
scriptional pathways. Candidate transcription factors that
NF-KB is expressed in nearly all mammalian cells.
are thought to direct programs of gene expression changes
Under physiologic (resting) conditions, NF-KBexists as an
after global ischemia include (1)CREB and nuclear factor
inactive form composed of the transcription factor dimer
kappa B (NF-KB),which direct pro-survival programs, and
and IKB (inhibitor of NF-KB) rotein, which maintains
9 NF-KB is activated in
(2) the Forkhead family of transcription factors and
NF-KB in an inactive
RESTlNRSF, which direct pro-death pathways in adult
response to a diverse range of external stimuli, including
neurons.
the cytokine TNF-a, neurotrophic factors such as nerve
CREB is a stimulus-induced transcription factor that
growth factor (NGF), neurotransmitters, cell adhesion
activates transcription of pro-survival (and pro-adaptive)
molecules, and various types of stress. These stimuli activate NF-KB by phosphorylation and proteosomal degradatarget genes in response to a wide array of external stimuli, including NMDAR-mediated Ca" influx at synaptic
tion of IKB, releasing the active, dimeric NF-KB. Upon
sites.'" Immediate early genes (IEGs), such as C-~OS,"~ activation, NF-KB translocates to the nucleus, where it
Bcl-2, IAPs, nNOS,ISOand BDNF,lgl are important to neubinds to upstream regulatory elements in KB-responsive
ronal survival and are gene targets of CREB.lZ1Upon
genes. These include the Ca2+-bindingprotein calbindin,
activation, CREB plays an important role in promoting
cytokines such as TNF-a and interleukin-2P (IL-p2) the
neuronal survival and adaptation in response to environantioxidant enzyme manganese superoxide dismutase
mental cues. Consistent with this notion, targeted deletion
(MnSOD), the anti-a o totic proteins Bcl-x, and Bcl-2,
of the genes encoding CREB and the CAMP-response
the IAPs, and BDNF.P93 PUpon activation, NF-KB plays an
element modulator (CREM) in neurons of the developing
important role in regulating cell survival and synaptic plasCNS elicits apoptosis. Postnatal ablation of CREB and
ticity in neurons. Focal ischemia activates NF-KB and reloCREM results in progressive neuronal degeneration in the
calizes it to the nucleus of ischemic neurons, where it binds
adult brain.'"
target genes.'% Targeted deletion of NF-KB significantly
reduces ischemic damage, suggesting a cell deathA member of the leucine-zipper superfamily of tranpromoting role of NF-KB in focal i~chemia."~
scription factors, CREB is activated in response to exterAs already mentioned, Forkheadl (FOXO-3A or
nal stimuli that activate intracellular signaling cascades,
FKHRL-l), a member of the Forkhead family of tranculminating in phosphorylation of CREB. Upon phosphoscription factors (FOXO-SA, FOXO-1, and AFX), induces
rylation, CREB forms a functionally active dimer that
expression of pro-apoptotic target gene^.^^^'^^). Under
binds the cis-acting CRE within the promoters of target
genes."' As already mentioned, Hardingham and colphysiologic conditions, FOXO-3A resides in the cytosol
leagues'" have found that the location of Ca" signaling in
away from target genes and is thus inactive. The neurotrophins (NGF, BDNF) and insulin-like growth factor-1
neurons critically controls CREB activity. Ca" influx via
(IGF-I) act via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)l
synaptic NMDARs promotes the activation of Ca2+protein kinase B (Akt) pathway to promote FOXO-3A
calmodulin-dependent kinase IV (CaMKIV) and the

842

Stroke: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management

phosphorylation.'96).PI3K promotes neuronal survival by
phosphorylation and activation of the serine-threonine
kinase Akt. Akt promotes cell suMval by phosphorylation
and inactivation of target genes implicated in apoptotic cell
death.'% FOXO-3A is a critical target of Akt phosphorylation and ina~tivation."~
Phosphorylation of FOXO-3A promotes its binding to the retention factor 14-3-3, which
retains FOXO-3A in the cytoplasm, away from target genes
such as FasL (Plate 42_8).196
Injurious stimuli trigger FOXO-3A dephosphorylation
and nuclear translocation. Putative targets of FOXO-3A
are the death cytokines FasL, TNF-a, and TRAIL (TNFrelated apoptosis-inducing ligand) and their cognate death
receptors, which are members of the TNF family of death
receptor^."^ The death cytokines act via the extrinsic or
death receptor-mediated pathway to initiate the caspase
death cascade. Global ischemia triggers expression of
FasL, which is implicated in the extrinsic or death-receptor pathway of caspase a~tivation."~
FasL, by binding to its
cognate death receptor Fas, recruits caspase-8, which initiates the caspase death cascade.
The gene silencing transcription factor REST/NRSF is
widely expressed during embryogenesis and la s a strategic role in terminal neuronal differentiation.l'J
In neural
progenitor cells and nonneural cells, REST actively
represses a large array of neural-specific genes important
to synaptic plasticity and synaptic remodeling, including
synaptic vesicle proteins, structural proteins, voltage-sensitive ion channels, and neurotransmitter receptors.'01~'02
Examples are synapsin I, superior cervical ganglion (SCG)the protein also known as "SCGlO, nicotinic acetyl
choline receptor, muscarinic acetylcholine m4 receptor,
F-opioid receptor, the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor subunit p2, and the AMPAR subunit GluR2. As
neural progenitors differentiate and migrate out of the
ventricular zone, REST downregulation is essential for
induction and maintenance of the neural phenotype. Perturbation of REST expression during embryogenesis
causes cellular apoptosis, aberrant differentiation and
patterning, and embryonic lethality.203
REST is a member of the Gli-Kriippel family of zincfinger transcriptional repressors; it contains nine noncanonical zinc-finger motifs through which it binds the
cis-acting RE1 (neuronal repressor element) within the
promoter region of target genesm' REST associates with
the co-repressors Sin3A and COREST,which in turn recruit
histone deacetylase (HDAC) to the promoters of target
genes.204The co-repressor complex silences gene transcription by deacetylation of core histone proteins and
tightening of the core chromatin complex, thus restricting
access of the transcription machinery required for gene
activation.201Chromatin remodeling is a universal mechanism of transcriptional repression and is implicated in
other histone-modulated processes, including DNA replication, recombination, and repair.
Dysregulation of REST and its target genes is implicated
in the atho enesis of Down's syndrome,205Alzheimer's
disease!% a i b s e t of medulloblastoma cells,207and global
ischemia.'" Global ischemia triggers a pronounced upregulation of REST mRNA and protein in selectively vulnerable CA1 neurons (Plate 42-9). Consistent with induction
of REST, core histone proteins over the GluR2 promoter
exhibit pronounced deacetylation, indicative of reduced

GluR2 promoter activity, and GluR2 mRNA and protein
expression are suppressed in CA1 neurons. Because the
GluR2 subunit governs AMPAR Ca2+permeability and
AMPARs are implicated in the excitotoxic death associated
with global ischemia, these changes are expected to affect
neuronal survival. Consistent with this concept, acute
knockdown (suppression) of the REST gene by administration of antisense oligonucleotides directed to the REST
mRNA administration rescues neurons from ischemic
death. These findings suggest a causal relation between
REST induction and neuronal death and implicate RESTdependent gene silencing and chromatin remodeling in
transcriptional repression of GluR2 in neurons subjected
to insult.

Inflammation
Considerable evidence indicates that inflammation exacerbates ischemic injury.209~2'o
Ischemia-hypoxia triggers
activation of transcription factors such as NF-KB, hypoxiainducible factor-1 (HIF-l), interferon regulatory factor-1,
and signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STATs) STAT3. These, in turn, orchestrate expression of
an array of proinflammatory target genes, such as plateletactivating factor and the cytokines TNF-a and IL-lP.211
Cytokines are critical mediators of inflammation and are
expressed within the first 2 hours after onset of ischemia.
The first inflammatory response is the unleashing of resident immune cells such as microglia. Microglia become
activated and exhibit characteristic ameboid morphology,
owing to retraction of their processes by 24 hours.
Subsequently, invasion and infiltration of nonresident
cells occur. Ischemia-hypoxia triggers expression of adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule 1
(ICAM-l), P-selectins, and E-selectins, by endothelial
cells on their luminal surfaces. The adhesion molecules
interact with cognate receptors on neutrophils, guiding
their migration across the vascular wall and inside the brain
parenchyma to the site of injury. Neutrophils are present
in high numbers in ischemic brain by 24 to 48 hours. Infiltration of lymphocytes, macrophages, and monocytes
follows next. Lymphocytes release inflammatory cytokines
such as TNF-a, which triggers production of chemokines
such as IL-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1'12
and thereby initiates the inflammatory reaction. Chemokines are a family of small, soluble adhesion molecules that
rapidly recruit leukocytes (blood-borne inflammatory cells)
from the circulation across the endothelial barrier to the
site of injury by promoting their adhesion and chemotaxis.
Macrophages appear in large quantity between 1 and 5
days after MCAO; by 5 to 7 days, they become the predominant cell type in the injured region, where they
phagocytose dead cells. The triggering of inflammatory
cascades and release of cytokines is thought to cause astrocyte death and exacerbate neuronal death.
Critical evidence that inflammatory responses are
involved in the pathogenesis of ischemia-induced neuronal
death comes from studies that show that ischemic injury is
attenuated by preischemic induction of systemic neutropenia, pharmacologic block of adhesion molecules or their
receptors, deletion of the ICAM-1 gene, anti-inflammatory
steroids or antibody block of inflammatory mediators such
as IL-lp or the transcription factor interferon regulatory

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

factor-1.'lo Mounting evidence indicates that, in addition
to its role as perpetrator of neuronal death, N O is a catalyst for microglial activation (see earlier discussion).

MECHANISMS OF
NEUROPROTECTION
Immediate Early Genes
IEGs are early response genes that are coordinately activated (dynamically regulated) in response to neuronal
activity and neuronal insults. Whereas some IEGs function
as a network of constitutively expressed (and coordinately
regulated) proteins that are upregulated in response to
activity or insult, other IEGs are activated only in response
to external stresses (stimuli).As such, IEGs are markers of
neural activity. A striking feature of the IEG response is
the broad functional repertoire of the molecules. These
include growth factors, transcription factors, enzymes that
synthesize neurotransmitters, synaptic vesicle proteins,
and ion channel and structural proteins (scaffolding,
adaptor, and cytoskeletal proteins). Examples are the proinflammation gene cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), an enzyme
implicated in synthesis of prostaglandins; neuronal activity-regulated pentraxin (Narp), implicated in the aggregation of AMPARs at excitatory synapses; activity-regulated
cytoskeleton-associated protein (Arc), a component of the
synaptic junctional complex; Homer, an adaptor protein
that binds mGluRs via their carboxy-terminal tails and
localizes them to excitatory synapses; and c-fos. A transcription factor, c-fos forms a heterodimer with a member
of the Jun family of transcription factors and binds to the
activator protein-1 (AP-1) promoter element to regulate
gene expression. More than half of IEGs are transcription
factors that act collectively to orchestrate expression of
delayed response genes involved in neuronal plasticity.
Neurond insults such as ischemia trigger activation of
CREB, which in turn drives transcription of IEGs. Within
minutes of ischemia, IEGs such as c-fos, c-jun, and zif268
are expressed in the entire hemisphere ipsilateral to the
occluded MCA.209Focal ischemia also induces expression
of nerve growth factors I-A, IB, and I-C, NF-KB, Nurr-lactivating transcription factor, and erg-2 and e r g 3 within
minutes of the ischemic episode.'13 Eng 1is a member of
the ether-a-gogo-related genes (ERG) family which encodes K' channel subunits. During the inflammation response, cytokines induce expression of proinflammatory
genes such as cox-2. Global ischemia induces expression of
a number of stress genes, including the IEGs c-fos, c-jun,
junB, knox, and zif268, within the first 30 minutes. In rats
and gerbils, global ischemia induces IEG expression
throughout the hippocampus, including vulnerable CA1
neuron^.^^^,^^^ Thus, whether or not IEGs play a protective
role in ischemia is unclear.213

Heat Shock Protein and Stress Genes
Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are a highly conserved family
of molecular chaperone proteins that play a role in the
aggregation, assembly, transport, and folding of proteins.
Under physiologic conditions, HSPs are critical to cell
growth and maintenance and are thought to play a role
in neuronal signaling, differentiation, and migration.

843

Harmful stresses such as ischemia trigger expression (or
upregulation) of HSPs, which act collectively to sustain
survival by limiting cellular damage and accelerate recovery by rescuing denatured proteins from degradation (the
"stress response."216Upon activation, HSPs act to prevent
aggregation of denatured proteins and aid in their refolding to the correct tertiary structure.
HSPs are typically classified according to their molecular weight. Examples are HSP10, HSP27, HSP32, HSP47,
HSP60, HSP70/72, HSP90, HSP100/105, and ubiquitin.
Some heat shock proteins, such as HSP6O and HSPSO, are
constitutively expressed and associated with specific intracellular organelles. HSP70 and Hsc70 are cytosolic. HSP75
is associated with mitochondria, and the glucose-regulated
protein (GRP78) gene with the endoplasmic reticulum.
Others, such as HSP27 and HSP70, are rapidly induced in
response to cellular stresses (see later).
HSPs are endowed with a modular structure that facilitates their regulato actions on protein translocation,
import, and folding? HSPs act via a carboxy-terminal
peptide-binding domain to bind stretches of hydrophobic
residues exposed in unfolded proteins. The energy for
these interactions is provided by an amino-terminal
ATPase domain, which binds and hydrolyzes ATP. HSPs
are a target of the serine-threonine kinase Akt, which phosphorylates and activates them by promoting trimerization.
Trimeric HSPs binds to heat-shock elements (HSEs)
within the promoter regions of target genes and stimulate
transcription of pro-survival genes.
Injurious stimuli such as hyperthermia, oxidative stress,
radiation, and ischemia can engage either or both of two
fundamental responses, apoptosis and the HSP stress
response, which functions to sustain survival by limiting
cellular damage and accelerating recovery. Research indicates that a fine balance between these two opposing
pathways may determine cellular susceptibility to damaging stresses.'17 Ischemia-hypoxia triggers pronounced
Focal
upregulation of HSPs such as HSP70.217,21G2221
ischemia induces a dramatic upregulation of HSP7O
protein expression in cells of the ischemic penumbra but
not in the core.222,223
The induction of HSPs in the penumbra is correlated with tolerance to subsequent ischemic
insults. Global ischemia triggers a massive upregulation of
HSP70 mRNA and protein expression, although the cellular specificity of expression and its relation to neuronal vulnerability are unclear."' Thus, whether or not HSP70 is
a major determinant of neuronal death associated with
global ischemia remains unsettled.'13
Evidence shows that HSP27, HSP70, and HSP9O exert
their cytoprotective effects by halting the self-amplifying
caspase death cascade and preventing a p o p t o s i ~Heat
.~~~
shock proteins 70, 90, and 27 each possess the ability to
prevent caspase-3 processing and activation. HSP70 and
HSPSO interact with Apaf-1 to prevent the recruitment of
caspase-9 to the apoptosome by directly associating with
Apaf-1 and preventing its oligomerization (see Plate 4 2 4 ) .
HSP27 binds and sequesters cytosolic cytochrome c away
from its target, Apaf-1.22P226
Consistent with its presumptive role in neuroprotection, overexpression of HSP70 provides efficient protection against cell death triggered by
harmful stresses. Transgenic mice that overexpress HSP7O
exhibit significantly reduced infarct volumes compared
with wild-type mice in models of focal ischemia,227and

844

Swoke: Patbopbysiolo8y, Diagnosis, and Management

HSP7O.1knockout mice exhibit significantlygreater infarct
volumes than wild-type mice.=' HSP72 overexpression is
neuroprotective, even when implemented after the onset
of global i~chemia.~'

nuclear transcription factors with a diverse range of target
genes, many of which are involved in orchestrating cell survival and proliferation. Growth factors can initiate signaling via either the PI3IUAkt (protein kinase B) pathway, the
Ras/MAPK signaling pathway, or both.Ig7

Spreading Depression

The PI3K/Akt Pathway
Glutamate receptor activation can elicit the production
and release of BDNF, which can signal through activation
of the PI3IUAkt or Ras/MAPK pathway. The survivalpromoting effects of neurotrophins (NGF, BDNF) and
other growth factors (IGF-I) are executed, at least in part,
through the PI3IUAkt p a t h ~ a y . PI3K
' ~ ~ enzymes
~
reside
in the cytosol and catalyze the formation of the lipid
3'-phophorylated phosphoinositides, which regulate the
localization and activity of a key component in neuronal
survival, the serine-threonine kinase Akt. PI3K acts via 3'phosphoinositol to phosphorylate and activate the serinethreonine kinase Akt (Plate 42-10). Upon activation, Akt
is translocated to the nucleus, where it exerts its actions on
gene expression. Akt promotes cell survival by suppressing
genes implicated in apoptotic cell death." In each case,
Akt phosphorylates and thereby inactivates its target.
Targets of Akt include the pro-apoptotic protein BAD (an
inhibitor of Bcl-2), pro-caspase-9, which is processed to
generate caspase-9 (an initiator of the caspase death
cascade), and the transcription factor Forkhead-1 (FOXO3A) (see Plate 42-8).'9fiJ97
Akt is uniquely endowed with a modular structure that
enables it to translocate to the nucleus and phosphorylate
target proteins in response to external stimuli. In addition
to a centrally located kinase domain, Akt has an N terminal pleckstrin homology domain, which mediates its
interactions with proteins and phospholipids. Upon binding to lipids, Akt is translocated from the cytoplasm to the
inner surface of the plasma membrane, which brings the
kinase into close proximity with its activators. PI3K is also
regulated by phospholipids. Thus, the lipid products generated by PI3K enzymes control the activity of Akt by
regulating its location and activation. The ability of neurotrophins to promote neuronal survival requires functional PI3WAkt signaling in the cell body and in distal
axons that are in contact with the dendrites of target
neurons. Critical evidence that Akt mediates neuronal survival comes from studies that show that Akt supports neuronal survival even in the absence of trophic factors and
that a dominant mutation of Akt inhibits neuronal survival
even in the presence of survival factor^.^'

Cortical spreading depression (CSD)is a wave of sustained
depolarization (neuronal inactivation) moving through
intact brain tissue and associated with brain ischemia,
migraine aura, and seizures.=' Spreading depression elicits
a temporary, but major, redistribution of ions between
intracellular and extracellular compartments without
causing irreversible damage. The ion rehstribution
becomes clinically significant under conditions of impaired
brain metabolism, such as global or focal ischemia. Injurious stimuli such as hypoxia trigger spreading depression.
As cells lose energy, energy-requiring pumps that normally
force ions into and out of the cell in an attempt to maintain a concentration gradient either fail or operate in
reverse. As previously described, these factors induce a
rapid efflux of K', which flows out of neurons via NMDARs
and a rise in extracellular K . The rapid rise in extracellular K' elicits neuronal excitation, followed by excessive
depolarization and a period of electrical silence during
which the potential at the brain surface becomes negative.
Ca2+ions flow in as the depolarization opens voltagedependent Ca2+channels and extracellular Ca" falls to
abnormally low levels. Na' and C1- enter neurons. Water
follows passively, driven by the influx of Na' and Cl-,which
greatly exceeds the efflux of K'. The extracellular space is
reduced, and edema ensues. Critical evidence that CSD is
NMDAR dependent comes from studies that show that
NMDAR antagonists block spreading depression completely in human neocortical tissue and delay the onset of
spreadmg depression in rat hippocampus.230
Astrocytes are thought to play a critical role in the
energy-dependent restitution of ion gradients that restores
normal neuronal activity. Astrocytes actively take up glutamate during normal neuronal activity. They are coupled via
gap junctions, which mediate spatial buffering of K .
Cooperation between glia and neurons maintains normal
extracellular ion and transmitter levels during neuronal
activity. Under conditions of spreading depression, glutamate transporters operate in reverse and astrocytes release
glutamate, prolonging the spreading depression. Ion fluxes
are enhanced and highly synchronized. Astrocytic gap
junctions are implicated in the synchronizationof neuronal
firing and propagation of spreading depression. Consistent
with this notion, gap junction blockers prevent the formation and propagation of CSD, and astrocytes cultured from
Cx43 knockout mice exhibit slow propagation of Ca2+
waves.23oCuriously (and inexplicably), mice with a conditional Cx43 knockout in brain exhibit accelerated propagation of spreading depression.='

Growth Factors and Neurotrophins
Growth factor-induced signal transduction proceeds via a
cascade of protein phosphorylation events that serve to
relay environmental cues into cellular responses. These
events ultimately culminate in activation of multiple

Ras/MAPK Pathway
Neurotrophins and other growth factors also promote cell
survival via the Ras/MAPK signaling pathway. The small
guanosine triphosphate-binding protein Ras is a mitogen
and key mediator of growth factor-dependent cell survival.
Growth factors act via their cognate cell surface receptors
to activate the MAPK signaling pathway, which entails a
series of sequential phosphorylation events leading ultimately to phos ho lation of the MAPK-activated kinases
known as R~ks!~~
x e Rsks promote cell survival by a dual
mechanism; they phosphorylate and inactivate the proapoptotic factor BAD and phosphorylate and potently activate the transcription factor CREB, which promotes

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

transcription of pro-sunival genes.239BDNF, a neurotrophin, acts via the Ras/MAPK pathway and extracellular
signal-regulated kinases 1and 2 to induce neuroprotection
in an in vivo model of neonatal hypoxic-ischemic brain
injury.%’
In the CNS, the best-characterized targets of growth
factor signaling are the extracellular signal-regulated
kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1 and ERK2). ERK phosphorylates
and activates nuclear transcription factors such as nuclear
transcription factor ELK-1 and CREB. Other ERK targets
are cytoskeletal proteins, cell adhesion molecules, ion
channels, and transcription factors. CREB stimulates cell
survival directly by activating transcription of bcl-2. In
addition, CREB stimulates transcription of immediate early
response genes, which in turn induce the delayed response
genes that influence neuronal activity, including growth
factors, enzymes that synthesize neurotransmitters, synaptic vesicle proteins, and ion channel and structural proteins. Thus, although there is a divergence in the survival
signaling pathways downstream of neurotrophin receptors,
both the PI3K and MAPK pathways converge on the same
set of proteins, BAD and CREB, to inhibit apoptosis.

Interneurons
GABA-releasing inhibitory interneurons (or “local circuit”
neurons) of the hippocampus and cortex are also thought
to contribute to the selective spatial patterns of neuronal
death in brain ischemia. Whereas pyramidal (or principal)
neurons of the hippocampal CA1 die because of global
ischemia, inhibitory interneurons of the CA1 (and other
subfields) survive. Inhibitory interneurons are typically
characterized by axons that make short-range projections
and release GABA onto their targets.” Interneurons comprise a diverse array of anatomical and neurochemical subtypes. Interneurons have typically been characterized
according to their neurochemical content (by calciumbinding proteins such as parvalbumin [PV], calbindin,
and calretinin or by neuromodulator-transmitters such as
somatostatin, neuropeptide Y,and nNOS). Many PV-positive interneurons are classified anatomically as basket cells
or interneurons that send their axons to the cell body of
the postsynaptic cell, surrounding it with a structure akin
to a basket. Many somatostatin-positive interneurons are
anatomically characterized as chandelier cells, a sub-class
of inhibitory interneurons whose morphology resembles a
chandelier, but there are many exceptions to the rule. Yet
a third classification is by action potential firing patternsfor example, fast-spiking cells, low-threshold cells, and
regular-spiking cells. Global ischemia kills pyramidal neurons of the hippocampal CA1, but interneurons in the CA1
survive. Studies have provided evidence for electrical
coupling between like interneurons mediated via gap

junction^.'^^
Gapjunctions are conductive channels that connect the
interiors of coupled cells.%’Their large internal diameters
( ~ 1 . nm)
2 allow the exchange of small ions and intracellular signaling molecules between neighboring cells. As a
result, gap junctions synchronize activity of coupled cells
and are thought to play an important role in intercellular
signaling in brain development, morphogenesis, and
pattern formation.wM Gap junctions are composed of

845

connexins, integral membrane proteins encoded by a gene
family of at least 20 structurally related members in
mammals. Although connexins share sequence similarity
and a common membrane topology, they assemble to form
channels that differ in gating and permeability properties
and in temporal and spatial patterns of expression. Three
gap junctional proteins, Cx32, Cx36, and Cx43, are
expressed abundantly in mammalian brain but with differing cellular specificity.Whereas Cx43 is the most abundant
connexin expressed by astrocytes, Cx32 is expressed predominantly in oligodendrocyte~~~’.~~
and interneurons;
Cx36 protein expression is n e u r o n - s p e c i f i ~ . ’ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
In CA1, PV-positive interneurons form a vast dendrodendritic network extending many hundreds of microns
and connected by anatomically identified electrical and
mixed electrical-chemical synapses. This network of
GABA-ergic interneurons is a candidate for the generator
of synchronized oscillations in hippocampus. Electrophysiologic evidence indicates the presence of electrical
coupling between GABA-ergic interneurons in the hippocampus and in visual cortex.251,252
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) studies indicate
that electrical coupling between interneurons in these
regions is likely to be mediated by Cx36 (and possibly
Cx32), which exhibits high expression in bipolar interneurons in layers 2 and 3 of visual cortex, interneurons, and
spiny stellate cells, and in layer 4 of barrel cortex and basket
cells in DG.252Electrical coupling between interneurons
is thought to mediate synchronous firing and thereby
promote inhibitory transmission. These observations raise
the possibility that Cx36 or Cx32 gap junction or both
might play a role in the survival of hippocampal interneurons or the death of pyramidal neurons after ischemia.
A 2001 s t u d y indicates that global ischemia induces a
selective upregulation of Cx36 (and Cx32) protein expression in PV-positive inhibitory interneurons in the vulnerable CA1 before the onset of neuronal death, consistent
with a role in the survival of GABA-ergic inter neuron^.^'
Moreover, transgenic Cx32 null-mutant mice exhibit
enhanced vulnerability to global ischemia-induced neuronal death. These findings provide a basis for understanding a role for neuronal gap junctions in defining
cell-specific patterns of neuronal injury after global
ischemia. Because global ischemia targets pyramidal
neurons of the CA1 while sparing inhibitory interneurons,
the findings just enumerated suggest the novel possibility
that enhanced expression of Cx36 may play a critical role
in the protection and survival of CA1 interneurons after
global ischemia. One possibility is that coupling of inhibitory interneurons promotes their survival by mediating
intercellular metabolic cooperation. Another possibility is
that enhanced coupling of inhibitory interneurons represents a failed attempt of such interneurons to rescue CA1
neurons. The greater vulnerability of CA1 pyramidal cells
in Cx32 knockout mice is consistent with observations that
neocortical cells in these mice display enhanced intrinsic
excitability and prolonged paroxysmal depolarizations,
indicating dysfunction of inhibitory synaptic transmissionem Moreover, late-depolarizing glutamatergic excitatory postsynaptic potentials are enhanced, indicating
reduced inhibitory input. Enhanced excitatory transmission and deficient inhibitory transmission would be

846

Stroke: Patbopbysiology, Diagnosis, and Management

expected to increase pyramidal cell excitability and
enhance vulnerability to excitotoxic cell death.

Astrocytes
Astrocytes are abundant glia (nonneural cells) present
throughout the brain, where they are positioned in close
association with neuron^.^,^^ Astrocytes can enwrap
synapses and play a critical role in transmitter uptake and
release during normal neuronal activity. In the hippocampus, 57% of the synapses are associated with the process
of an astrocyte. Astrocytes also have extensive contacts with
endothelial cells from capillaries. Thus, astrocytes are well
positioned to mediate signaling between neurons, between
neurons and astrocytes, and between neurons and capillaries. Astrocytes respond to a variety of synaptically
released transmitters, including glutamate, noradrenaline,
histamine, acetylcholine, ATP and GABA. Application of
any of these transmitters to astrocytes elicits sustained or
oscillating elevations of intracellular Ca2+concentration in
the astrocytes. Ligands that evoke Ca2+elevations in astrocytes can cause the release of glutamate from astrocytes in
a Ca'+-dependent manner. The three mechanisms that
have been proposed to mediate the Ca'+-dependent release of glutamate from astrocytes are reverse operation of
glutamate transporters, an anion-channel dependent
pathway induced by swelling, and Ca2+-dependentexocytosis. Mounting evidence supports exocytosis as the key
mechanism mediating glutamate release.
Astrocytes are thought to play a critical role in the neuronal death associated with focal ischemia.254-256
Swelling
of astrocytes contributes to infarct size in focal ischemia.
Four to 6 hours after focal ischemia, astrocytes become
hypertrophic and displace a greater volume. Both antiexcitotoxic and anti-apoptotic interventions reduce infarct
volume, not just neuronal cell death, in animal models of
focal ischemia. Astrocyte death may occur as a secondary
consequence of neuronal death, possibly as a result of
release of cytokines and the triggering of inflammatory cascades. In animal models of global ischemia, astrocytes
survive and play an important role in reactive gliosis after
neuronal loss.
Evidence supports a role for interastrocytic gap junctions in the s read of secondary injury associated with focal
Astrocyhc gap junctions remain functional
in postischemic brain, and gap junction blockers limit the
secondary expansion of infarcts after focal ischemia. In
cultures, dying glia propagate cell death to healthy bystanders in proportion to their expression of gap junctions and
functional coupling. Presumably, the "metabolic cooperation" mediated by gap junctions between healthy and dying
cells provides too great a metabolic stress for the healthy
cells. These findings suggest that astrocyhc gap junctions
might propagate and amplify neuronal death after global
ischemia as well, and cooperativity in death of CA1
neurons after global ischemia has been proposed. Coupling of astrocytes can also attenuate neuronal death in
some paradigms and appears to play a neuroprotective role
in helping neurons to maintain Ca2+homeostasis in the
presence of oxidative stress. Administration of uncouplers
of gap junctions, such as 18a-glycyrrhetinic acid (AGA),
to slice cultures exacerbates neuronal death induced by
oxidative stress.

A number of mechanisms have been proposed to explain
the neuroprotective role of coupling between astrocytes;
they include (1)enhanced synthesis and release of protective signaling molecules from astrocytes, (2) reduced synthesis and release of neurotoxic substances, (3)enhanced
removal of glutamate from the intercellular space, and (4)
spatial buffering of K'. Astrocytes synthesize and release
neurotrophic factors and cytokines, such as nerve growth
factor, TNF-a, and basic fibroblast growth factor,260and
are rich in the antioxidant enzyme catalase, which may
increase survival after global ischemia.

NEUROPROTECTIVE STRATEGIES
Ischemic Tolerance
Ischemic tolerance is a well-known phenomenon in which
brief ischemic insults (ischemic preconditioning) confer
robust neuroprotection to hippocampal CA1 neurons
against a subsequent severe ischemic challenge.No~'fi1-2M
Ischemic tolerance can also be induced in vivo by spreading depression, hypoxia, and activation of A1 adenosine
and inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation and in vitro by
exposure to excitotoxins. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying ischemic tolerance are not yet fully delineated, the considerable delay from the preconditioning
stimulus until onset of ischemic tolerance is consistent with
a role for transcriptional changes in adaptation. Ischemic
precondtioning enhances expression of the anti-apoptotic
factor Bcl-2, which can act upstream of caspase-3 to
prevent initiation of the caspases and downstream to
directly bind activated cas ase 3 to halt the self-amplifying caspase death cascade.
Ischemic tolerance is thought to require activation of
NMDA-type ionotropic glutamate receptors and enhanced
Ca2+as well as opening of ATP-sensitive K' channels via
activation of adenosine A, receptors. Ischemic preconditioning is known to activate c-fos and c-jun and a number
of survival factors, HSP70, superoxide dismutase, NO,
BDNF, and the anti-apoptotic factors Bcl-2 and Bcl-x,.
Spreading depression can induce ischemic tolerance.
CSD preconditioning induces expression of pro-survival
genes such as nNOS, Ca2+-independentprotein kinase C ,
c-fos, junB, c-jun, and MAP kinase phosphatase-1 (MKPl),and reduces infarct volume in animal models of focal
ischemia.267The rise in intracellular Ca2+associated with
CSD activates nNOS, which promotes NO formation.268
The rise in extracellular glutamate associated with spreading depression promotes phosphorylation and activation of
ERKl and ERK2.2fi7
Upon activation, ERK phosphorylates
the synaptic vesicle protein synapsin I, which promotes
transmitter release and a rise in extracellular glutamate.

g -

Neuroprotection by Estrogen in Experimental
Models of Stroke
Estradol, the primary estrogen produced and secreted b
the ovaries, has widespread actions on the brain.269,2
Y
Estradiol increases spine density, synapse number, and
NMDA receptor NR1 subunit expression and potentiates
kainate-elicited currents in CA1 pyramidal neurons. Moreover, estrogen affords neuroprotection in several experimental models of
Acute exogenous estrogen at

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death

physiologic levels protects against focal ischemia-induced
cortical injury in estrogen-deprived female and male rats
and mi~e.'~'-''~To afford protection, estradiol must be
present at physiologic concentrations at least 48 hours
before focal ischemia. Clues as to the molecular mechanisms by which estrogen affords protection come from
studies showing that estrogen acts via estrogen receptor-a
(ERa) to afford neuroprotection in the focal ischemia
modelz7' and induces upregulation of ERa and the antiapoptotic factor Bcl-2 neurons (Plate 42-11).279
Estrogen also provides neuroprotection in animal models
of global ischemia. Acute estrogen at supraphysiologic concentrations protects against global ischemia-induced hippocampal inju?'
and improves behavioral outcome
after ischemia in male gerbils with ischemia.282Moreover,
long-term administration of estrogen at more physiologic
concentrations typically used in hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) gives robust protection." In addition to
direct actions on hippocampal neurons, estrogen may affect
hippocampal neurons indirectly via ERs on basal forebrain
cholinergic neurons, which innervate the CA1 or via a
receptor-independent anti-oxidative mechanism to inhibit
oxygen radical-induced lipid peroxidation. The importance
of postmenopausal estrogen replacement therapy for protection against the neuronal death associated with cardiac
arrest or stroke, however, remains controversial.
The classic mode of estrogen action on neurons involves
binding to the intracellular estrogen receptors ERa
and ERP, which function as ligand-activated transcription
f a ~ t o r s . ' ~Estrogen
~ ~ ' ~ ~ binding to ERa or ERP induces a
conformational change leading to release of HSPs and formation of a dimer with high affinity for specific DNA
sequences known as estrogen response elements (EREs),
which are located at the promoter region of target genes.
EREs occur in a diverse set of genes involved in cell survival and cell proliferation. EREs include the growth
factors NGF, BDNF, and IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR)and the
anti-apoptotic factors Bcl-2 and Bcl-x,. The estrogen
receptor can also interact with transcription factors such as
c-jun and c-fos, with transcriptional enhancers and repressors, and with other DNA elements, such as AP1 sites.2a.2a
AP1 is a dimeric transcription factor complex AP1, whose
key com onents are the proteins Fos and Jun.
In ad 'tion to its genomic actions, estrogen signals
rapidly via the PI3K/Akt signabng pathway, the Ras/MAPK
signaling pathway, or both.'= PI3K phosphorylates and
activates Akt, which promotes cell survival by suppression
of pro-apoptotic target genes. These genes include the proapoptotic proteins BAD and pro-caspase-9 and FOXO-3A.
FOXO-3A induces apoptosis by transactivation of the Fas
ligand, which acts via the Fas receptor to initiate the
caspase cascade. Akt phosphorylates FOXO-3A, eliciting
its relocalization from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, away
from target genes. Estrogen acts via the PI3WAkt signaling pathway (see earlier discussion) to afford protection
of cortical neurons in culture against glutamate toxicity.
Findings also indicate that estrogen blocks apoptotic
signaling cascades in a gerbil model of global ischemia."
An intriguing possibility is that estrogen acts via Akt to
halt the caspase death cascade at the point of Forkhead
activation.
Estrogen also signals rapidly via Ras/MAPK and the
downstream kinases ERKl and ERK2. MAPK signaling

t;l

847

promotes cell survival via phosphorylation and inactivation
of BAD and via phosphorylation and activation of CREB,
which promotes transcription of pro-survival target genes.
Estrogen rapidly phosphorylates ERKl and ERK2, which
phosphorylate and inactivate the downstream kinase glycogen synthase kina.se-3P (GSK-3P). Estrogen is a powerful
inducer of MAPK in various models, including neocortical
explants, primary cortical neurons, and neuroblastoma
cells.269Estrogen acts via the Ras/MAPK pathway and
ERKl and ERK2 to promote neuronal survival of cortical
neurons against glutamate toxi~ity.'~~'*~
Considerable evidence implicates crosstalk between
E R a and IGF-I signaling in the actions of estrogen on
neuron^.^^^^^^' ERa and ERP are colocalized with IGF-IRs
in neurons and astrocytes throughout the brain. Estrogen
and IGF-I each engage the PI3UAkt and MAPK signaling cascades. Estrogen neuroprotection in vivo and in
vitro requires growth factor signaling. Research has shed
light on the molecular mechanisms underlying this unique
codependence. Upon activation, ERa interacts with IGFIR to form a supramolecular complex that includes ERa,
IGF-IR, the p85 subunit of PI3K, and IRS-1.2ssFormation
of such a supramolecular complex is likely to prove critical
to the protective actions of estrogen against ischemic
death.

Neuroprotection by Zinc Chelation
Considerable evidence indicates that a rise in intracellular
Zn'' to toxic levels in CA1 neurons contributes to global
ischemia-induced neuronal death. Zn2+chelation affords
robust protection against global ischemia-induced neuronal death.'" Koh and colleagues'59 were the first to
demonstrate that Zn'' translocation from presynaptic terminals to postsynaptic target neurons occurs relatively
early after neuronal insult and is not restricted to CA3 and
hilar neurons (see Plate 42-7). Moreover, exposure of cortical neurons to Zn2+elicited a rise in intracellular Zn", as
assessed by the selective fluorescent indicator dye TSQ. To
examine whether the rise in Zn'' was causally related to
neuronal death, Koh and colleagues injected the cell membrane impermeant chelator calcium disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (CaEDTA) into the lateral ventricles 30
minutes before global ischemia markedly reduced the rise
in Zn'' in CA1 (and hilar) neurons and abolished neuronal
death. Although CaEDTA is not specific for Zn", it has a
higher affinity for Zn'' than for Ca'+ or M e . Thus,
CaEDTA can bind Zn'' without significantly altering intracellular Ca" or M e . Moreover, CaEDTA blocks Zn2+
neurotoxicity in vitro but not the neurotoxicity of Cu'' or
Fe". These findings suggest strongly that Zn'' is a critical
mediator of ischemia-induced cell death.
These observations raise the possibility of novel targets
for neuroprotection. A major problem inherent with membrane-impermeant Zn'' chelators is achieving adequate
access of membrane-impermeable zinc chelators to the
CNS. Alternative strategies include block of channels that
mediate entry of Zn'' into neurons; block or attenuation
of release of synaptic Zn2+;upregulation of transporters
responsible for Znz+ extrusion, sequestration, or both;
upregulation of metallotransporters; and counteraction of
downstream disturbances involved in neuronal death (e.g.,
block of mitochondrial respiration). Promising leads along

848

Stroke: Patbopbysiology, Diagnosis, and Management

these lines include dietary manipulation of synaptic zinc
stores, intake of pyruvate to compensate for Zn2+-induced
blockade of glycolysis, and pharmacologic block of Zn2+induced a p o p t ~ s i s . ~ ~ ’

Hypothermia

4. Swain JA, Anderson RV, Siegman MG: Low-How cardiopulmonary
bypass and cerebral protection: A summary of investigations. Ann
Thorac Surg 56:14961492, 1993.
5 . Schmidt-Kastner R, Freund TF: Selective vulnerability of the hippocampus in brain ischemia. Neuroscience 40:599-636, 1991.
6. Crain BJ, Westerkam WD, Harrison AH, et al: Selective neurond
death after transient forebrain ischemia in the Mongolian gerbil: A
silver impregnation study. Neuroscience 27:387-402, 1988.
7. Kirino T: Delayed neuronal death in the gerbil hippocampus following ischemia. Brain Res 2395749, 1982.
8. Garcia JH, Yoshida Y, Chen H, et al: Progression from ischemic
injury to infarct following middle cerebral artery occlusion in the
rat. Am J Pathol 142:62%635, 1993.
9. Memezawa H, Smith ML, Siesjo BK: Penumbral tissues salvaged
by reperfusion following middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats.
Stroke 23:55%.559, 1992.
10. Small DL, Buchan AM: Animal models. Br Med Bull 56:307317,

Hypothermic therapy (lowering of the body temperature
during or after ischemic insult) affords robust neuroprotection against global ischemia induced neuronal death.2w
Prolonged, postischemic hypothermia provides robust and
sustained neuronal survival and greatly reduces ischemiainduced cognitive deficits in rats and gerbils.56~290~2y1
Brief
forebrain ischemia kills more than 98% of CA1 pyramidal
2000.
neurons. Prolonged, delayed hypothermia (induced 1hour
11. Ginsbere MD. Busto R: Rodent models ofcerebral ischemia. Stroke
after ischemia and maintained for 48 hours) persistently
20:1627:1642, 1989.
(for as many as 60 days) preserves the ultrastructure of and
12. Pulsinelli WA, Brierley JB: A new model of bilateral hemispheric
ischemia in the unanesthetized rat. Stroke 10:267-272, 1979.
protects more than 90% of CA1 neurons from ischemiaKitagawa K, Matsumoto M, Yang 6, et al: Cerebral ischemia after
13.
induced death. Hypothermia can be initiated as late as 12
bilateral carotid artery occlusion and intraluminal suture occlusion
hours after ischemia, although the neuroprotective effect
in mice: Evaluation of the patency of the posterior communicating
is significantly less than when hypothermia is initiated 1
artery. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 18:57&579, 1998.
14. Oguro K, Jover T, Tanaka H, et al: Global ischemia-induced
hour after ischemia. These findings support the potential
increases in the gap junctional proteins connexin 32 (Cx32) and
clinical usefulness of postischemic hypothermia as a mode
Cx36 in hippocampus and enhanced vulnerability of Cx32 knockof intervention after global ischemia associated with
out mice. J Neurosci 21:7534-7542, 2001.
cardiac arrest or cardiac surgery in humans.
15. Nemoto EM: Monkey model of complete global ischemia. Stroke
Hypothermia decreases cerebral blood flow, intracranial
24:328-329, 1993.
16. Torregrosa G, Barbera MD, Centeno JM, et al: Characterization of
pressure, and brain metabolism. It also reduces cerebral
the cortical laser-Doppler flow and hippocampal degenerative patmetabolic rate, which results in decreased consumption of
terns after global cerebral ischaeinia in the goat. PHugers Arch
glucose and oxygen. The reduction in energy demand
435:66%669, 1998.
slows the rate of high-energy phosphate (ATP) depletion
17. Pulsinelli WA, Duffy TE: Regional energy balance in rat brain
after transient forebrain ischemia. J Neurochem 40:1500-1503,
and lactate accumulation and thereby lessens oxidative
1983.
stress. Curiously, although hypothermia protects against
18. Schmidt-Kastner R, Freund TF: Selective vulnerability of the hipglobal ischemia-induced neuronal death, it exacerbates
pocampus in brain ischemia. Neuroscience 40:599-636, 1991.
neuronal injury associated with focal ischemia.
19. Pulsinelli WA, Brierley JB, Plum F: Temporal profile of neuronal
There are a number of mechanisms by which hypotherdamage in a model of transient forebrain ischemia. Ann Neurol
11:491-498, 1982.
mia protects against hypoxia. Only a few, however, are
20. Kirino T, Sano K: Fine structural nature of delayed neuronal death
understood. During ischemia, there is a rise in extracellufollowing ischemia in the gerbil hippocampus. Acta Neuropathol
lar K’, in part due to efflux of K’ from vulnerable neurons
(Berl) 62:209-218, 1984.
via NMDARs and in part due to breakdown and reverse
21. Kirino T, Tamura A, Sano K: Selective vulnerability of the hipto ischemia: Reversible and irreversible t p e s of ischemic
operation of ion pumps such as the N ~ + - K + - A T P ~ S ~ . ~ ’ pocampus
~
cell damage. Prog Brain Res 63:3958, 1985.
Hypothermia reduces synaptic activity (the rate of neu22. Kinouchi H, Sharp FR, Koistinaho J, et al: Induction of heat shock
ronal firing) and, in effect, relieves the cell of its excessive
hsp7O mRNA and HSP70 kDa protein in neurons in the ‘penumextracellular K+.292Findings also indicate that hypothermia
bra’ following focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Brain Res
promotes survival of neurons by accelerating recovery of
6193334-338, 1993.
23. Pulsinelli WA, Levy DE, Duffy TE: Regional cerebral blood How
ATP and other important sources of cellular energy in the
and glucose metabolism following transient forebrain ischemia. Ann
mitochondria to physiologic levels.293Future studies will
Neurol 11:499502, 1982.
more completely elucidate the molecular mechanisms by
24. Raffin CN, Harrison M, Sick TJ, et al: EEG suppression and anoxic
which hypothermia affords protection.
depolarization: influences on cerebral oxygenation during ischemia.

References
1. On-line Medical Dictionary. Dept. of Medical Oncology, University
of Newcastle. http://cancenveb.ncl.ac.uk/cgi-bidomd?ischemiaO
1997-2003.
la. Petito CK, Feldmann E, Pulsinelli WA, et al: Delayed hippocampal damage in humans following cardiorespiratory arrest. Neurology 37:1281-1286, 1987.
2. Brillman J: Central nervous system complications in coronary artery
bypass graft surgery. Neurol Clin 11:475-495, 1993.
3. Roach GW, Kanchuger M, Mangano CM, et al: Adverse cerebral
outcomes after coronary bypass surgery: Multicenter Study of Perioperative Ischemia Research Group and the Ischemia Research and
Education Foundation Investigators. N Engl J Med 3351857-1863,
1996.

J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 11:407415, 1991.
2 5 Xu ZC, Pulsinelli WA: Responses of CA1 pyramidal neurons in rat
hippocampus to transient forebrain ischemia: An in vivo intracellular recording study. Neurosci Lett 171:187-191, 1994.
26. Smith ML, Auer RN, Siesjo BK: The density and distribution of
ischemic brain injury in the rat following 2-10 min of forebrain
ischemia. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 64:31%332, 1984.
27. Smith ML, Bendek G, Dahlgren N, et al: Models for studying longterm recovery following forebrain ischemia in the rat. 2: A 2-vessel
occlusion model. Acta Neurol Scand 69:385401, 1984.
28 Lipton P: Ischemic cell death in brain neurons. Physiol Rev 79:
1431-1568, 1999.
29 Kato H, Araki T, Kogure K, et al: Sequential cerebral blood How
changes in short-term cerebral ischemia in gerbils. Stroke 21:
134g1349, 1990.
30 Suzuki R, Yamagnchi T, Li CL, et al: The effects of 5-minnte
ischemia in Mongolian gerbils. 11: Changes of spontaneous neuronal

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death
activity in cerebral cortex and CA1 sector of hippocampus. Acta
Neuropathol (Berl) 60:217-222, 1983.
31. Schauwecker PE, Steward 0:Genetic determinants of susceptibility
to excitotoxiccell death: Implications for gene targeting approaches.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:4103-4108, 1997.
32. DeCirolami U, Crowell RM, Marcoux FW:Selective necrosis and
total necrosis in focal cerebral ischemia: Neuropathologic observations on experimental middle cerebral artery occlusion in the
macaque monkey. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol43:57-71, 1984.
33. Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, et al: Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20:84-91,
1989.
34. Nagasawa H, Kogure K: Correlation between cerebral blood flow
and histologic changes in a new rat model of middle cerebral artery
occlusion. Stroke 20:1037-1043, 1989.
35. Zhang RL, Chopp M, Chen H, et al: Temporal profile of ischemic
tissue damage, neutrophil response, and vascular plugging following permanent and transient (2H) middle cerebral artery occlusion
in the rat. J Neurol Sci 125:3-10, 1994.
36. McAuley MA: Rodent models of focal ischemia. Cerebrovasc Brain
Metab Rev 7:153-180, 1995.
37. Buchan AM, Xue D, Slivka A: A new model of temporary focal neocortical ischemia in the rat. Stroke 23273-279, 1992.
38. Kilic E, Hermann DM, Hossmann KA: A reproducible model of
thromboembolic stroke in mice. Neuroreport 9:2967-2970, 1998.
39. Markgraf CG, Kraydieh S, Prado R, et al: Comparative histopathologic consequences of photothrombotic occlusion of the distal
middle cerebral artery in Sprague-Dawley and Wistar rats. Stroke
24:286292, 1993.
40. Brint S, Jacewicz M, Kiessling M, et al: Focal brain ischemia in the
rat Methods for reproducible neocortical infarction using tandem
occlusion of the distal middle cerebral and ipsilateral common
carotid arteries. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 83474485, 1988.
41. Chen ST, Hsu CY, Hogan EL, et al: A model of focal ischemic stroke
in the rat Reproducible extensive cortical infarction. Stroke 17:
73&743, 1986.
42. Petito CK: Early and late mechanisms of increased vascular permeability following experimental cerebral infarction. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol38:222-234, 1979.
43. Rice JE, Vannucci RC, Brierley JB: The influence of immaturity on
hypoxic-ischemic brain damage in the rat. Ann Neurol 9:131-141,
1981.
44. Roohey T, Raju TN, Moustogiannis AN: Animal models for the
study of perinatal hypoxic-ischemicencephalopathy:A critical analysis. Early Hum Dev 47:115-146, 1997.
45. Salford LC, Plum F, Brierley JB: Graded hypoxia-oligemia in rat
brain. 11: Neuropathological alterations and their implications.Arch
Neurol29:234238, 1973.
46. Williams GD, Towfighi J, Smith MB: Cerebral energy metabolism
during hypoxia-ischemiacorrelates with brain damage: A 31P N M R
study in unanesthetized immature rats. Neurosci Lett 170:3134,
1994.
47. Dawson VL, Kizushi VM, Huang PL, et al: Resistance to neurotoxicity in cortical cultures from neuronal nitric oxide synthasedeficient mice. J Neurosci 16:2479-2487, 1996.
48. Goldberg MP, Choi DW: Combined oxygen and glucose deprivation in cortical cell culture: Calcium-dependent and calciumindependent mechanisms of neuronal injury. J Neurosci 13:
35103524, 1993.
49. Martin RL, Lloyd HG, Cowan AI: The early events of oxygen and
glucose deprivation: Setting the scene for neuronal death? Trends
Neurosci 17251-257, 1994.
50. Gottron FJ, Ying HS, Choi DW: Caspase inhibition selectively
reduces the apoptotic component of oxygen-glucose deprivationinduced cortical neuronal cell death. Mol Cell Neurosci 9:159-169,
1997.
51. Pellegrini-Giampietro DE, Peruginelli F, Meli E, et al: Protection
with metabotropic glutamate 1 receptor antagonists in models of
ischemic neuronal death: Time-course and mechanisms. Neuro-.
pharmacology 38:1607-1619, 1999.
52. Strasser U, Fischer G: Protection from neuronal damage induced
by combined oxygen and glucose deprivation in organotypic hippocampal cultures by glutamate receptor antagonists. Brain Res
687:167-174, 1995.
53. Friedlander RM: Apoptosis and caspases in neurodegenerative diseases. N Engl J Med 348:1365-1375, 2003.

849

54. Leist M, Jaattela M: Four deaths and a funeral: From caspases to
alternative mechanisms. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2:589598, 2001.
55. Choi DW: Ischemia-induced neuronal apoptosis. Curr Opin Neurobiol6:667-672, 1996.
56. Colbourne F, Sutherland GR, Auer RN: Electron microscopic evidence against apoptosis as the mechanism of neuronal death in
global ischemia. J Neurosci 19:42004210, 1999.
57. Banasiak KJ, Xia Y, Haddad GG: Mechanisms underlying hypoxiainduced neuronal apoptosis. Prog Neurobiol62:215249,2OOO.
58. Kalimo H, Garcia JH, Kamijyo Y, et al: The ultrastructure of “brain
death.” 11: Electron microscopy of feline cortex after complete
ischemia. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol 25:207-220, 1977.
59. Kalimo H, Olsson Y, Paljarvi L, et al: Structural changes in brain
tissue under hypoxic-ischemic conditions. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 2(Suppl 1):S19-S22, 1982.
60. Kirino T, Sano K: Selective vulnerability in the gerbil hippocampus
following transient ischemia. Acta Neuropathol (Bed) 62:201-208,
1984.
61. Petito CK, Pulsinelli WA: Sequential development of reversible
and irreversible neuronal damage following cerebral ischemia. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol43:141-153,1984.
62. Brown AW, Brierley JB: Anoxic-ischaemic cell change in rat brain
light microscopic and fine-structural observations. J Neurol Sci
16:59-84, 1972.
63. Brown AW: Structural abnormalities in neurones. J Clin Pathol
Suppl (R Coll Pathol) 11:155169, 1977.
64. Inamura K, Olsson Y, Siesjo BK: Substantia nigra damage induced
by ischemia in hyperglycemic rats: A light and electron microscopic
study Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 75:131-139, 1987.
65. Martin-Villalba A, Herr I, Jeremias I, et al: CD95 ligand (Fas
YAPO-IL) and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand mediate ischemia-induced apoptosis in neurons. J Neurosci
19:38093817, 1999.
66. Fujimura M, Morita-Fujimura Y, Murakami K, et al: Cytosolic redistribution of cytochrorne c after transient focal cerebral ischemia in
rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 18:1239-1247, 1998.
67. Namura S, Zhu J, Fink K, et al: Activation and cleavage of caspase3 in apoptosis induced by experimental cerebral ischemia. J
Neurosci 18:36594668, 1998.
68. Benveniste H, Drejer J, Schousboe A, et al: Elevation of the extracellular concentrations of glutamate and aspartate in rat hippocampus during transient cerebral ischemia monitored by intracerebral
microdialysis. J Neurochem 43:136%1374, 1984.
69. Cardell M, Koide T, Wieloch T Pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in
the rat cerebral cortex following cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 9:350-357, 1989.
70. Tominaga T, Kure S, Narisawa K, et al: Endonuclease activation following focal ischemic injury in the rat brain. Brain Res 608:21-26,
1993.
70a. McLaughlin B, Hartnett KA, Erhardt JA, et al: Caspase-3 activation is essential for neuroprotection in preconditioning. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 100(2):71S720,2003.
70b. Gamier P, Ying W, Swanson RA: Ischemic preconditioning by
caspase cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1. J Neurosci
23(22):7967-7973, 2003.
71. Chen J, Nagayama T, Jin K, et al: Induction of caspase-3-like protease may mediate delayed neuronal death in the hippocampus after
transient cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci 1834914-4928, 1998.
72. Chen J, Nagayama T, Jin K, et al: Induction of caspase-3-like protease may mediate delayed neuronal death in the hippocampus after
transient cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci 18:49144928, 1998.
73. Nicholson DW, Thornberry NA: Caspases: Killer proteases. Trends
Biochem Sci 22:299-306, 1997.
74. Cohen GM: Caspases: The executioners of apoptosis. Biochem
J 326:l-16, 1997.
75. Kroemer G, Reed JC: Mitochondrial control of cell death. Nat Med
6:513-519, 2000.
76. Burgering BM, Kops GJ: Cell cycle and death control: Long live
Forkheads. Trends Biochem Sci 27:352-360, 2002.
77. Cryns V, Yuan J: Proteases to die for. Genes Dev 12:1551-1570,1998.
78. Jin K, Graham SH, Nagayama T, et d: Altered expression of the
neuropeptide-processing enzyme carboxypeptidase E in the rat
brain after global ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
21:142%1429, 2001.
79. Bagum MA, Miyamoto 0, Toyoshima T, et al: The contribution of
low &ty
NGF receptor (p75NGFR) to delayed neuronal death

850

Stroke: PatbopbysioLogy, Diagnosis, and Management

after ischemia in the gerbil hippocampus. Acta Med Okayama
55:19-24, 2001.
80. Jover T, Tanaka H, Calderone A, et al: Estrogen protects against
global ischemia-induced neuronal death and prevents activation of
apoptotic signaling cascades in the hippocampal CA1. J Neurosci
22:2115-2124,2002.
81. Lee TH, Abe K, Kogure K, et al: Expressions of nerve growth factor
and p75 low affinity receptor after transient forebrain ischemia in
gerbil hippocampal CA1 neurons. J Neurosci Res 41:684-695,1995.
82. Krajewski S, Krajewska M, Ellerby LM, et d:Release of caspase-9
from mitochondria during neuronal apoptosis and cerebral
ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:57525757, 1999.
83. MacManus JP, Buchan AM, Hill IE, et al: Global ischemia can cause
DNA fragmentation indicative of apoptosis in rat brain. Neurosci
Lett 16449-92, 1993.
84. Ouyang YB, Tan Y, Comb M, et al: Survival- and death-promoting
events after transient cerebral ischemia: Phosphorylation of Akt,
release of cytochrome C and activation of caspase-like proteases.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 19:1126-1135, 1999.
85. Deveraux QL, Reed JC: IAP family proteins-suppressors of apoptosis. Genes Dev 13:239-252, 1999.
86. Salvesen GS, Duckett CS: IAP proteins: Blocking the road to death‘s
door. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol3:401410, 2002.
87. Salvesen GS, Duckett CS: IAP proteins: Blocking the road to death’s
door. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol3:401410, 2002.
88. Weissman AM: Themes and variations on ubiquitylation. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2:169-178, 2001.
89. Shi Y: A structural view of mitochondria-mediated apoptosis. Nat
Struct Bio18:394401, 2001.
90. Hengartner MO: The biochemistry of apoptosis. Nature
407:770-776, 2000.
91. Xue D, Horvitz HR: Caenorhabditis elegans CED-9 protein is a
bifunctional cell-death inhibitor. Nature 390:305308, 1997.
92. Shimazaki K, Ishida A, Kawai N: Increase in bcl-2 oncoprotein and
the tolerance to ischemia-induced neuronal death in the gerbil hippocampus. Neuroscience Research 20:95-99, 1994.
93. D’Amours D, Desnoyers S, DSilva I, et al: Poly(ADP-ribosy1)ation
reactions in the regulation of nuclear functions. Biochem J
342:249-268, 1999.
94. Folbergrova J, Memezawa H, Smith ML, et al: Focal and perifocal
changes in tissue energy state during middle cerebral artery occlusion in normo- and hyperglycemic rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
12:25-33, 1992.
95. Folbergrova J, Zhao Q, Katsura K, et al: N-tert-butyl-alphaphenylnitrone improves recovery of brain energy state in rats
following transient focal ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
92:50575061, 1995.
96. Szabo C, Dawson VL: Role of poly(ADP-ribose) synthetase in
inflammation and ischaemia-reperfusion. Trends Pharmacol Sci
19:287-298, 1998.
97. Eliasson MJ, Sampei K, Mandir AS, et al: Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase gene disruption renders mice resistant to cerebral ischemia.
Nat Med 3:1089-1095, 1997.
98. Endres M, Wang ZQ, Namura S, et al: Ischemic brain injury is
mediated by the activation of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase.J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 17:1143-1151, 1997.
99. Pieper AA, Walles T, Wei G, et al: Myocardial postischemic injury
is reduced by polyADPripose polymerase-1 gene disruption. Mol
Med 6:271-282, 2000.
100. Mandir AS, Poitras MF, Berliner AR, et al: NMDA but not nonNMDA excitotoxicity is mediated by poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase.
J Neurosci 20:8005-8011, 2000.
101. Zhang J, Dawson VL, Dawson TM, et al: Nitric oxide activation of
poly(ADP-ribose)synthetase in neurotoxicity. Science 263:687-689,
1994.
102. Chiarugi A, Moskowitz MA: Cell biology: PARP-1: A perpetrator of
apoptotic cell death? Science 297:20&201,2002.
103. Yu SW, Wang H, Poitras MF, et al: Mediation of poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1-dependent cell death by apoptosis-inducing factor.
Science 297:259-263, 2002.
104. Choi DW: Calcium-mediated neurotoxicity: Relationshipto specific
channel types and role in ischemic damage. Trends Neurosci
11:465469, 1988.
105. Lucas DR, Newhouse JP: The toxic effect of sodium L-glutamate
on the inner layers of the retina. Arch Ophthalmol 58:193-201,
1957.

Ho OL: Brain damage in infant mice following oral intake
106. Olney p,
of glutamate, aspartate or cysteine. Nature 227:609-611, 1970.
107. Kass IS, Lipton P: Mechanisms involved in irreversible anoxic
damage to the in vitro rat hippocampal slice. J Physiol332:459-472,
1982.
108. Rothman SM: Synaptic activity mediates death of hypoxic neurons.
Science 220:536-537, 1983.
109. Rothman SM: The neurotoxicity of excitatory amino acids is produced by passive chloride influx. J Neurosci 5:1483--1489,1985.
110. Simon RP, Swan JH, Griffiths T, et al: Blockade of N-methyl-Daspartate receptors may protect against ischemic damage in the
brain. Science 226:850-852, 1984.
111. Choi DW: Calcium-mediated neurotoxicity: Relationshipto specific
channel types and role in ischemic damage. Trends Neurosci
11:465-469, 1988.
112. Tsubokawa H, Oguro K, MasuzawaT, et al: Ca(2c)-dependent nonNMDA receptor-mediated synaptic currents in ischemic CA1 hippocampal neurons. J Neurophysiol71:1190-1196,1994.
113. Tsubokawa H, Oguro K, Robinson HP, et al: Intracellular inositol
1,3,4,5-tetra!&phosphate enhances the calcium current in hippocampal CA1 neurones of the gerbil after ischaemia. J Physiol
(Lond) 497:67-78, 1996.
114. Oguro K, Nakamura M, Masuzawa T: Histochemical study of
Ca(2+)-ATPaseactivity in ischemic CA1 pyramidal neurons in the
gerbil hippocampus. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 90:448453, 1995.
115. Choi DW: Calcium: Still center-stage in hypoxic-ischemicneuronal
death. Trends Neurosci 18:58-60, 1995.
116. Meldrum B, Garthwaite J: Excitatory amino acid neurotoxicity and
neurodegenerative disease. Trends Pharmacol Sci 11:379-387,
1990.
117. Baker AJ, Zornow MH, Scheller MS, et al: Changes in extracellular concentrations of glutamate, aspartate, glycine, dopamine, serotonin, and dopamine metabolites after transient global ischemia in
the rabbit brain. J Neurochem 57:1370-1379,1991.
118. Mitani A, Kataoka K: Critical levels of extracellular glutamate
mediating gerbil hippocampal delayed neuronal death during
hypothermia: Brain microdialysis study. Neuroscience 42:661470,
1991.
119. Lee JM, Zipfel GJ, Choi DW: The changing landscape of ischaemic
brain injury mechanisms. Nature 399:A7-A14, 1999.
120. Hardingham GE, Fukunaga Y, Bading H: Extrasynaptic NMDARs
oppose synaptic NMDARs by triggering CREB shut-off and cell
death pathways. Nat Neurosci 5:405-414, 2002.
121. Lonze BE, Riccio A, Cohen S, et al: Apoptosis, axonal growth
defects, and degeneration of peripheral neurons in mice lacldng
CREB. Neuron 34:371385,2002.
122. Hardingham GE, Bading H: The yin and yang of NMDA receptor
signalling. Trends Neurosci 26:8149, 2003.
123. Lonze BE, Ginty DD: Function and regulation of CREB family
transcription factors in the nervous system. Neuron 35:605-623,
2002.
124. Riccio A, Ginty DD: What a privilege to reside at the synapse:
NMDA receptor signaling to CREB. Nat Neurosci 5:389-390,2002.
125. Yu SP, Canzoniero LM, Choi DW: Ion homeostasis and apoptosis.
Curr Opin Cell Biol 13:405-411, 2001.
126. Hollmann M, Hartley M, Heinemann S: Ca2+ permeability of KAAMPA-gated glutamate receptor channels depends on subunit
composition. Science 252:851-853, 1991.
127. Verdoorn TA, Burnashev N, Monyer H, et al: Structural determinants of ion flow through recombinant glutamate receptor channels.
Science 252:1715-1718, 1991.
128. Borges K, Dingledine R: AMPA receptors: Molecular and functional diversity. Prog Brain Res 116:153-170, 1998.
129. Friedman LK, Pellegrini-Giampietro DE, Sperber EF, et al:
Kainate-induced status epilepticus alters glutamate and GABAA
receptor gene expression in adult rat hippocampus: An in situ
hybridization study. J Neurosci 14:2697-2707, 1994.
130. Prince HK, Conn PJ, Blackstone CD, et al: Down-regulation of
AMPA receptor subunit GluR2 in amygdaloid kindling. J Neurochem 64:46%465, 1995.
131. Tanaka H, Grooms SY, Bennett MV, et al: The AMPAR subunit
GluR2: Still front and center-stage. Brain Res 886:190-207,
2000.
132. Pulsinelli W, Sarokin A, Buchan A: Antagonism of the NMDA and
non-NMDA receptors in global versus focal brain ischemia. Prog
Brain Res 96:125-135. 1993.

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Nechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death
133. Sheardown MJ: The pharmacology of AMPA receptors and their
antagonists. Stroke 24:114&1147, 1993.
134. Nurse S, Corbett D: Neuroprotection after several days of mild,
drug-inducedhypotbermia.J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 16:474480,
1996.
134a. Noh K, Yokota H, Castillo PE, et al: GluR2-lacking, calciumpermeable AMPA receptors in ischemia-induced delayed neuronal
death in hippocampal CA1. Society for Neuroscience Abstract,
2002, Program No. 539.4.
135. Weiss JH, Sensi SL: Ca2+-Zn2+permeable AMPA or kainate receptors: Possible key factors in selective neurodegeneration. Trends
Neurosci 23:365-371, 2000.
136. Gorter JA, Petrozzino JJ, Aronica EM, et al: Global ischemia
induces downregulation of Glur2 mRNA and increases AMPA
receptor-mediated Ca2+ influx in hippocampal CA1 neurons of
gerbil. J Neurosci 17:617%6188, 1997.
137. Oguro K, Oguro N, Kojima T, et al: Knockdown of AMPA receptor
GluR2 expression causes delayed neurodegeneration and increases
damage by sublethal ischemia in hippocampal CA1 and CA3
neurons. J Neurosci 19:9218-9227, 1999.
138. Ying HS, Weishaupt JH, Grabh M, et al: Sublethal oxygen-glucose
deprivation alters hippocampal neuronal AMPA receptor expression
and vulnerability to kainate-induced death. J Neurosci 17:95369544, 1997.
139. ONeill MJ, Bogaert L, Hicks CA, et al: LY377770, a novel iGlu5
kainate receptor antagonist with neuroprotective effects in global and
focal cerebral ischaemia. Neuropharmacology 39:1575-1588,2000.
140. Furukawa K, Fu W, Li Y, et al: The actin-severing protein gelsolin
modulates calcium channel and NMDA receptor activities and vulnerability to excitotoxicity in hippocampal neurons. J Neurosci
17:81784186, 1997.
141. Chen ZL, Strickland S: Neuronal death in the hippocampus is promoted by plasmin-catalyzed degradation of laminin. Cell 91:917925, 1997.
142. Choi DW: Cerebral hypoxia: Some new approaches and unanswered questions. J Neurosci 10:2493-2501, 1990.
143. Rothman SM, Olney JW Glutamate and the pathophysiology of
hypoxic-ischemic brain damage. Ann Neurol 19:105-111, 1986.
144. Siesjo BK, Bengtsson F: Calcium fluxes, calcium antagonists, and
calcium-related pathology in brain ischemia, hypoglycemia, and
spreading depression: A unifying hypothesis. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 9:127-140, 1989.
145. Tsubokawa H, Oguro K, Robinson HP, et al: Abnormal Ca2+ homeostasis before cell death revealed by whole cell recording of ischemic
CA1 hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience 49:807-817, 1992.
146. Takei N, Endo Y: Ca2+ ionophore-induced apoptosis on cultured
embryonic rat cortical neurons. Brain Res 65265-70, 1994.
147. Johnson EM Jr, Koike T, Franklin J: A “calcium set-point hypothesis” of neuronal dependence on neurotrophic factor. Exp Neurol
115:16%166, 1992.
148. Juin P, Pelletier M, Oliver L, et al: Induction of a caspase-3-like
activity by calcium in normal cytosolic extracts triggers nuclear
apoptosis in a cell-freesystem. J Biol Chem 273:17559-17564,1998.
149. Gaido ML, Cidlowski JA: Identification, purification, and characterization of a calcium-dependent endonuclease (NUC18) from
apoptotic rat thymocytes. NUC18 is not histone H2B. J Biol Chem
266:1858&18585, 1991.
150. Choi DW, Koh JY Zinc and brain injury. Annu Rev Neurosci
21347375, 1998.
151. Palmiter RD, Cole TB, Quaife CJ, et d: ZnT-3, a putative transporter of zinc into synaptic vesicles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
93314934-14939, 1996.
152. Assaf SY, Chung SH: Release of endogenous Zn2+ from brain tissue
during activity. Nature 3083734-736, 1984.
153. Howell GA, Welch MG, Frederickson CJ: Stimulation-induced
uptake and release of zinc in hippocampal slices. Nature 308:736
738,1984.
154. Li Y, Hough CJ, Frederickson CJ, et al: Induction of mossy fiber ->
Ca3 long-term potentiation requires translocation of synaptically
released Zn2+. J Neurosci 21:8015-8025,2001.
155. Aniksztejn L, Charton G, Ben Ari Y: Selective release of endogenous zinc from the hippocampal mossy fibers in situ. Brain Res
404:58-64, 1987.
156. Sloviter RS: A selective loss of hippocampal mossy fiber Timm stain
accompanies granule cell seizure activity induced by perforant path
stimulation. Brain Res 330:150-153, 1985.

851

157. Yanamoto H, Nagata I, Sakata M, et al: Infarct tolerance induced
by intra-cerebral infusion of recombinant brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Brain Res 859:240-248, 2000.
158. Weiss JH, Hartley DM, Koh JY, et al: AMPA receptor activation
potentiates zinc neurotoxicity. Neuron 10:43-49, 1993.
159. Koh JY, Suh SW, Gwag BJ, et al: The role of zinc in selective neuronal death after transient global cerebral ischemia. Science
272:1013-1016, 1996.
160. Grooms SY, Opitz T, Bennett MY et al: Status epilepticusdecreases
glutamate receptor 2 mRNA and protein expression in hippocampal pyramidal cells before neuronal death. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 97:36313636,2000.
161. Koh JY, Choi DW: Zinc alters excitatory amino acid neurotoxicity
on cortical neurons. J Neurosci 832164-2171, 1988.
162. Weiss JH, Turetsky D, Wilke G, et al: AMPNkainate receptor-mediated damage to NADPH-diaphorase-containing neurons is Ca2+
dependent. Neurosci Lett 167:9%96, 1994.
163. Harris RJ, Symon L, Branston NM, et al: Changes in extracellular
calcium activity in cerebral ischaemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
1:203-209, 1981.
164. Gido G, Kristian T, Siesjo BK: Extracellular potassium in a neocortical core area after transient focal ischemia. Stroke 28:206-210,
1997.
165. Nedergaard M, Hansen AJ: Characterization of cortical depolarizations evoked in focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
13:568-574, 1993.
166. Nicotera P, Leist M, Fava E, et al: Energy requirement for caspase
activation and neuronal cell death. Brain Path01 10:276282,2000.
167. Harris RJ, Symon L:Extracellular pH, potassium, and calcium activities in progressive ischaemia of rat cortex. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 4:178-186, 1984.
168. Hengartner MO: The biochemistry of apoptosis. Nature 407:770776,2000.
169. Wang HG, Pathan N, Ethell IM, et al: Ca2+-induced apoptosis
through calcineurin dephosphorylation of BAD. Science 284339343,1999.
170. Baranano DE, Ferris CD, Snyder SH: Atypical neural messengers.
Trends Neurosci 24:99-106, 2001.
171. Bredt DS, Ferris CD, Snyder SH: Nitric oxide synthase regulatory
sites. Phosphorylation by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase,
protein kinase C, and calciudcalmodulin protein kinase: Identification of flavin and calmodulin binding sites. J Biol Chem
267:10976-10981, 1992.
172. Garthwaite J: Glutamate, nitric oxide and cell-cell signalling in the
nervous system. Trends Neurosci 14:60-67, 1991.
173. Kumura E, Yoshimine T, Iwatsuki KI, et d: Generation of nitric
oxide and superoxide during reperfusion after focal cerebral
ischemia in rats. Am J Physiol27O:C7W752, 1996.
174. Liu PK, Grossman RG, Hsu CY,et al: Ischemic injuv and faulty
gene transcripts in the brain. Trends Neurosci 24:581988,2001.
175. Bolanos JP, Heales SJ, Land JM, et al: Effect of peroxynitrite on the
mitochondrial respiratory chain: Differential susceptibility of neurones and astrocytes in primary culture. J Neurochem 64:19651972, 1995.
176. Liu PK, Arora T:Transcripts of damaged genes in the brain during
cerebral oxidative stress. J Neurosci Res 70:71%720,2002.
177. Love S: Oxidative stress in brain ischemia. Brain Path01 9:119-131,
1999.

178. Chan PH: Reactive oxygen radicals in signaling and damage in the
ischemic brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 21:2-14,2001.
179. Aronowski J, Strong R, Grotta JC: Citicoline for treatment of experimental focal ischemia: histologic and behavioral outcome. Neurol
Res 18:570-574, 1996.
180. Agullar HI, Botla R, Arora AS, et al: Induction of the mitochondrial
permeability transition by protease activity in rats: A mechanism of
hepatocyte necrosis. Gastroenterology 110:558-566, 1996.
181. Sensi SL, Yin HZ, Carried0 SG, et al: Preferential Zn2+ influx
through Ca2+-permeable AMPA/kainate channels triggers prolonged mitochondrial superoxide production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 96:2414-2419,1999.
182. Zolotajova N, Ho C, Mellgren RL, et al: Different sensitivities of
native and oxidized forms of Na+/K(+)-ATPaseto intracellular proteinases. Biocbim Biophys Acta 1192:12.%131, 1994.
183. Liu PK: Ischemia-reperfusion-relatedrepair deficit after oxidative
stress: Implications of faulty transcripts in neuronal sens
brain injury. J Biomed Sci 104-13,2003.

852

Spoke: Pathophysiology, Diagnosis, and Management

184. Back T, Zhao W, Ginsberg MD: Three-dimensional image analysis
of brain glucose metabolism-blood flow uncoupling and its electrophysiological correlates in the acute ischemic penumbra following
middle cerebral artery occlusion. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
15:566577, 1995.
185. Back T, Ginsberg MD, Dietrich WD, et al: Induction of spreading
depression in the ischemic hemisphere following experimental
middle cerebral artery occlusion: Effect on infarct morphology.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 16:20%213, 1996.
186. Baker CJ, Fiore AJ, Frazzini VI, et al: Intraischemic hypothermia
decreases the release of glutamate in the cores of permanent focal
cerebral infarcts. Neurosurgery 36:99&1001, 1995.
187. Bairnbridge KG, Celio MR, Rogers JH: Calcium-binding proteins
in the nervous system. Trends Neurosci 15:303-308, 1992.
188. Ashkenazi A, Dixit VM: Death receptors: Signaling and modulation.
Science 281:1305-1308, 1998.
189. Sheng M, Greenberg ME: The regulation and function of c-fos
and other immediate early genes in the nervous system. Neuron
4:477435, 1990.
190. Sasaki M, Gonzalez-Zulueta M, Huang H, et al: Dynamic regulation of neuronal NO synthase transcription by calcium influx
through a CREB family transcription factor-dependent mechanism.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 97:8617-8622,2000.
191. TaoX, Finkbeiner S, Arnold DB, et al: Ca2+ influx regulates BDNF
transcription by a CREB family transcription factor-dependent
mechanism. Neuron 20:709-726, 1998.
192. Kornhauser JM, Cowan CW, Shaywitz AJ, et al: CREB transcriptional activity in neurons is regulated by multiple, calcium-specific
phosphorylation events. Neuron 34:221-233, 2002.
193. Mattson MP, Camandola S: NF-kappaB in neuronal plasticity and
neurodegenerative disorders. J Clin Invest 107:247-254,2001,
194. Schneider A, Martin-Villalba A, Weih F, et al: NF-kappaB is activated and promotes cell death in focal cerebral ischemia. Nat Med
5:554-559, 1999.
195. Brunet A, Datta SR, Greenberg ME: Transcription-dependent and
-independent control of neuronal survival by the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:297305, 2001.
196. Datta SR, Brunet A, Greenberg ME: Cellular survival: A play in
three Akts. Genes Dev 13:2905-2927, 1999.
197. Kaplan DR, Miller FD: Neurotrophin signal transduction in the
nervous system. Curr Opin Neurobiol 10:381391, 2000.
198. Brunet A, Datta SR, Greenberg ME: Transcription-dependent and
-independent control of neuronal survival by the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. Curr Opin Neurobiol 11:297305, 2001.
199. Chong JA, Tapia-Ramirez J, Kim S, et al: -REST A mammalian
silencer protein that restricts sodium channel gene expression to
neurons. Cell 80:949-957, 1995.
200. Schoenherr CJ, Paquette AJ, Anderson DJ: Identification of potential target genes for the neuron-restrictive silencer factor. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 93:9881-9886, 1996.
201. Schoenherr CJ, Anderson DJ: Silencing is golden: Negative regulation in the control of neuronal gene transcription. Cum Opin
Neurobiol5:566571, 1995.
202. Roopra A, Sharling L, Wood IC, et al: Transcriptional repression by
neuron-restrictive silencer factor is mediated via the Sin3-histone
deacetylase complex. Mol Cell Biol20:2147-2157, 2000.
203. Chen ZF, Paquette AJ, Anderson DJ: NRSFBEST is required in
vivo for repression of multiple neuronal target genes during
embryogenesis [see comments]. Nat Genet 20:13&142, 1998.
204. Ballas N, Battaglioli E, Atouf F, et al: Regulation of neuronal
traits by a novel transcriptional complex. Neuron 31:35%365,2001.
205. Bahn S, Mimmack M, Ryan M, et al: Neuronal target genes of the
neuron-restrictive silencer factor in neurospheres derived from
fetuses with Down’s syndrome: A gene expression study. Lancet
359:310315, 2002.
206. Okazaki T, Wang H, Masliah E, et al: SCG10, a neuron-specific
growth-associated protein in Alzheimer’sdisease. Neurobiol Aging
16:88%894, 1995.
207. Lawinger P, Venugopal R, Guo ZS, et al: The neuronal repressor
RESTINRSF is an essential regulator in medulloblastoma cells. Nat
Med 6:826-831, 2000.
208. Calderone A, Jover T, Noh KM, et al: Ischemic insults derepress
the gene silencer REST in neurons destined to die. J Neurosci
23:2112-2121,2003,
209. Iadecola C: Bright and dark sides of nitric oxide in ischemic brain
injury Trends Neurosci 20:132-139, 1997.

210. Dirnagl U, Iadecola C, Moskowitz MA Pathobiology of ischaemic
stroke: An integrated view. Trends Neurosci 22:391397, 1999.
211. Ishibashi N, Prokopenko 0,Reuhl KR, et al: Inflammatoryresponse
and glutathione peroxidase in a model of stroke. J Immunol
168:19261933,2002.
212. Stevens SL, Bao J, Hollis J, et d: The use of flow cytometry to evduate temporal changes in inflammatory cells following focal cerebral ischemia in mice. Brain Res 932:llO-119,2002.
213. Sharp FR, Massa SM, Swanson RA: Heat-shock protein protection.
Trends Neurosci 2297-99, 1999.
214. Kiessling M, Stumm G, Xie Y,et al: Differential transcription and
translation of immediate early genes in the gerbil hippocampus after
transient global ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 133914924,
1993.
215. Dragunow M, Beilharz E, Sirimanne E, et al: Immediate-early gene
protein expression in neurons undergoing delayed death, but not
necrosis, following hypoxic-ischaemicinjury to the young rat brain.
Brain Res Mol Brain Res 25:19-33,1994.
216. Parsell DA, Lindquist S: The function of heat-shock proteins in
stress tolerance: Degradation and reactivation of damaged proteins.
Annu Rev Genet 27:437496, 1993.
217. Beere HM: Stressed to death: Regulation of apoptotic signaling
pathways by the heat shock proteins. Sci STKE 93:REl. 2001.
218. Papadopoulos M, Sun X,Cao J, et al: Over-expression of HSP-70
protects astrocytes from combined oxygen-glucose deprivation.
Neuroreport 7:429-432, 1996.
219. Plumier J, Kruejer A, Currie R, et al: Transgenic mice expressing
the human inducible HSP70 have hippocampal neurons resistant to
ischemic injury. Cell Stress Chaperones 2:162-167, 1997.
220. Wagstaff M, Collaco-Moraes Y, Smith J, et al: Protection of neuronal cells from apoptosis by HSP27 delivered with a herpes simplex
virus-based vector. J Biol Chem 274:5069, 1999.
221. Yenari MA, Fink SL, Sun G, et d: Gene therapywith HSP72 is neuroprotective in rat models of stroke and epilepsy. Ann Neurol
443584591, 1998.
222. Kinouchi H, Sharp FR, Koistinaho J, et al: Induction of heat shock
HSP70 mRNA and HSP7O kDa protein in neurons in the “penumbra” following focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Brain Res
6193334438, 1993.
223. Li Y, Chopp M, Zhang ZG, et al: Neuronal survival is associated
with 72-kDa heat shock protein expression after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion in the rat. J Neurol Sci 120:187-194,
1993.
224. Bruey JM, Ducasse C, Bonniaud P, et al: Hsp27 negatively regulates cell death by interacting with cytochrome c. Nat Cell Biol
2645-652, 2000.
225. Pandey P, Saleh A, Nakazawa A, et al: Negative regulation of
cytochrome c-mediated oligomerization of Apaf-1 and activation of
procaspase-9 by heat shock protein 90. EMBO J 19:431C!4322,
2000.
226. Saleh A, Srinivasula SM, Balkir L, et al: Negative regulation of
the Apaf-1 apoptosome by HSP7O. Nat Cell Biol 2:47M83,
2000.
227. Rajdev S, Hara K, Kokubo Y, et al: Mice overexpressing rat heat
shock protein 70 are protected against cerebral infarction. Ann
Neurol47:782-791, 2000.
228. Lee S-H, Kim M, Yoon B-W, et al: Targeted HSP70.1 disruption
increases infarction volume after focal cerebral ischemia in mice.
Stroke 32:2905-2912,2001.
229. Hoehn B, Ringer TM, Xu L, et al: Overexpression of HSP72 after
induction of experimental stroke protects neurons from ischemic
damage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 11:1303-1309,2001.
230. James MF, Smith JM, Boniface SJ, et al: Cortical spreading depression and migraine: New insights from imaging? Trends Neurosci
24:26&271, 200 1.
231. Theis M, Jauch R, Zhuo L, et al: Accelerated hippocampal spreading depression and enhanced locomotory activity in mice with astrocyte-directed inactivation of connexin43. J Neurosci 23:76&776,
2003.
232. Crowder RJ, Freeman RS: Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Akt
protein kinase are necessary and sufficient for the survival of nerve
growth factor-dependent sympathetic neurons. J Neurosci 18:29332943, 1998.
233. Kuruvilla R, Ye H, Ginty DD: Spatially and functionally distinct
roles of the P13-K effector pathway during NGF signaling in sympathetic neurons. Neuron 27:49!3512,2000.

Chapter 42: Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Ischemia-Induced Neuronal Death
234. Philpott KL, McCarthy MJ, Klippel A, et al: Activated phosphatidylinositol3-kinaseand Akt kinase promote suwival of superior cervical neurons. J Cell Biol 139809-815, 1997.
235. Rosenmund C, Westbrook GL: Calcium-induced actin depolymerimtion reduces NMDA channel activity. Neuron 10:805-814,
1993.
236. Yao R, Cooper GM: Requirement for phosphatidylinositol-3kinase
in the prevention of apoptosis by nerve growth factor. Science
267:2003-2006, 1995.
237. Yuan J, Yankner BA: Apoptosis in the nervous system. Nature
407:80W309,2000.
238. Pearson G, Robinson F, Beers GT, et al: Mitogen-activatedprotein
(MAP) kinase pathways: Regulation and physiological functions.
Endocr Rev 22:153-183,2001.
239. Bonni A, Brunet A, West AE, et al: Cell suwival promoted by the
Ras-MAPK signaling pathway by transcription-dependent andindependent mechanisms. Science 286:135%1362,1999.
240. Nandagopal K, Dawson TM, Dawson VL: Critical role for nitric
oxide signaling in cardiac and neuronal ischemic preconditioning
and tolerance. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 297:474478, 2001.
241. McBain CJ. Fisahn A: Interneurons unbound. Nat Rev Neurosci
2:ll-23, 2001.
242. Galarreta M, Hestrin S: Electrical synapses between GABAreleasing interneurons Nat Rev Neurosci 2:425-433, 2001.
243. Bennett MV, Barrio LC, Bargiello TA, et al: Gap junctions: New
tools, new answers, new questions. Neuron 6:305320, 1991.
244. Bruzzone R, White TW,Paul DL: Connections with connexins: The
molecular basis of direct intercellular signaling. Eur J Biochem
238:l-27, 1996.
245. Dermietzel R, Spray DC: From neuro-glue (‘Nervenkitt’)to glia: A
prologue. Glia 24:l-7, 1998.
246. Goodenough DA, Goliger JA, Paul DL: Connexins, connexons, and
intercellular communication. Annu Rev Biochem 65:475-502:
475-502, 1996.
247. Kunzelmann P, Blumcke I, Traub 0, et al: Coexpression of connexin45 and -32 in oligodendrocytes of rat brain. J Neurocytol
2617-22, 1997.
248. Li J, Hertzberg EL, Nagy JI: Connexin32 in oligodendrocytes and
association with myelinated fibers in mouse and rat brain. J Comp
Neurol379:571591, 1997.
249. Rash JE, Staines WA, Yasumura T,et al: Immunogold evidence that
neuronal gap junctions in adult rat brain and spinal cord contain
connexin-36 but not connexin-32 or connexin-43. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 97:7573-7578,2OOO.
250. Soh1 6, Degen J, Teubner B, et al: The murine gap junction gene
connexin36is highly expressed in mouse retina and regulated during
brain development. FEBS Lett 4282741, 1998.
251. Gibson JR, Beierlein M, Connors BW: Two networks of electrically coupled inhibitory neurons in neocortex. Nature 402:75-79,
1999.
252. Venance L, Rozov A, Blatow M, et al: Connexin expression in electrically coupled postnatal rat brain neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 97:10260-10265,2000.
252a. Oguro K, Jover T, Tanaka H: Global ischemia-induced increases in
the gap junctional proteins connexin 3 (Cx32) and Cx36 in hippocampus and enhanced vulnerability of Cx32 knock out mice. J
Neurosci 21(19):7534-7542, 2001.
253. Sutor B, Schmolke C, Teubner B, et al: TI-myelination defects and
neuronal hyperexcitability in the neocortex of connexin 32-deficient
mice. Cereb Cortex 10:684-697,2000.
254. Haydon PG: Neuroglial networks: Neurons and glia talk to each
other. Cum Biol 10:R712-R714,2000.
255. Haydon PG: GLIA: Listening and talking to the synapse. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2:185-193,2001.
256. Lin B, Ginsberg MD, Busto R: Hyperglycemicexacerbation of neuronal damage following forebrain ischemia: Microglial, astrocytic
and endothelial alterations. Acta Neuropathol (Bed) 96:610-620,
1998.
257. Rawanduzy A, Hansen A, Hansen TW, et d:Effective reduction of
infarct volume by gap junction blockade in a rodent model of stroke.
J Neurosurg 87:916-920, 1997.
258. Warner DS, Ludwig PS, Pearlstein R, et al: Halothane reduces focal
ischemic injury in the rat when brain temperature is controlled.
Anesthesiology 82:1237-1!X5, 1995.
259. Saito R, Graf R, Hubel K, et al: Reduction of infarct volume by
halothane: Effect on cerebral blood flow or perifocal spreading

853

depression-like depolarizations. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
17:857-864,1997.
260. Eckenstein FP: Fibroblast growth factors in the nervous system.
J Neurobiol25:1467-1480,1994.
261. Ktagawa K, Matsumoto M, Kuwabara K, et al: ‘Ischemic tolerance’
phenomenon detected in various brain regions. Brain Res
561:203-211, 1991.
262. Liu Y, Kato H, Nakata N, et al: Protection of rat hippocampus
against ischemic neuronal damage by pretreatment with sublethal
ischemia. Brain Res 586:121-124, 1992.
263. Nishi S, Taki W, Uemura Y, et al: Ischemic tolerance due to the
induction of HSP70 in a rat ischemic recirculation model. Brain Res
615:281-288, 1993.
264. Simon RP, Niiro M, Gwinn R: Prior ischemic stress protects against
experimental stroke. Neurosci Lett 163:135-137, 1993.
265. Wu C, Zhan RZ, Qi S, et al: A forebrain ischemic preconditioning
model established in C57BlacWCj6 mice. J Neurosci Methods
107:lOl-106,2001.
266. Kirino T: Ischemic tolerance. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
22:128%1296,2002.
267. Chow AK, Thompson CS, Hogan MJ, et al: Cortical spreading
depression transiently activates MAP kinases. Brain Res Mol Brain
Res 99:75-81,2002.
268. Obrenovitch TP, Urenjak J, Wang M: Nitric oxide formation during
cortical spreading depression is critical for rapid subsequent recovery of ionic homeostasis. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 22:680-688,
2002.
269. Behl C: Oestrogen as a neuroprotective hormone. Nat Rev
Neurosci 3:433-442,2002.
270. McEwen B, Akama K, Alves S, et al: Tracking the estrogen receptor in neurons: Implications for estrogen-induced synapse formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:7093-7100,2001.
271. Hum PD, Macrae IM: Estrogen as a neuroprotectant in stroke.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 20:631452,2000.
272. Culmsee C, Vedder H, Ravati A, et al: Neuroprotection by estrogens in a mouse model of focal cerebral ischemia and in cultured
neurons: Evidence for a receptor-independent antioxidative mechanism. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 191263-1269, 1999.
273. Dubal DB, Kashon ML, Pettigrew LC, et al: Estradiol protects
against ischemic injury. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 18:1253-1258,
1998.
274. Dubal DB, Zhu H, Yu J, et al: Estrogen receptor alpha, not beta, is
a critical link in estradiol-mediated protection against brain injury.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:1952-1957, 2001.
275. Dubal DB, Wise PM: Neuroprotective effects of estradiol in
middle-aged female rats. Endocrinology 142:43-48, 2001.
276. Rusa R, Alkayed NJ, Crain BJ, et al: 17beta-estradiol reduces stroke
injuv in estrogen-deficient female animals. Stroke 30:166S1670,
1999.
277. Toung TJ, Traystman RJ, Hum PD: Estrogen-mediated neuroprotection after experimental stroke in male rats. Stroke 29:1666-1670,
1998.
278. Dubal DB, Zhu H, Yu J, et al: Estrogen receptor alpha, not beta, is
a critical link in estradiol-mediated protection against brain injury.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:1952-1957, 2001.
279. Dubal DB, Shughrue PJ, Wilson ME, et al: Estradiol modulates bcl2 in cerebral ischemia: A potential role for estrogen receptors.
J Neurosci 19:6385-6393, 1999.
280. Chen J, Adachi N, Liu K, et al: The effects of 17beta-estradiol on
ischemia-induced neuronal damage in the gerbil hippocampus.
Neuroscience 87:817-822, 1998.
281. Sudo S, Wen TC, Desaki J, et al: Beta-estradiol protects hippocampal CA1 neurons against transient forebrain ischemia in
gerbil. Neurosci Res 29345354, 1997.
282. Kondo Y, Suzuki K, Sakuma Y: Estrogen alleviates cognitive dysfunction following transient brain ischemia in ovariectomized
gerbils. Neurosci Lett 238:4548, 1997.
283. McKenna NJ, O M d e y BW: Combinatorial control of gene expression by nuclear receptors and coregulators. Cell 108:465-474,2002.
284. Nilsson S, Makela S, Treuter E, et d: Mechanisms of estrogen
action. Physiol Rev 81:1535-1565, 2001.
285. Kelly MJ, Levin ER: Rapid actions of plasma membrane estrogen
receptors. Trends Endocrinol Metab 12:15S156, 2001.
286. Harms C, Lautenschlager M, Bergk A, et d: Differential mechanisms of neuroprotection by l7beta-estradiol in apoptotic versus
necrotic neurodegeneration. J Neurosci 21:2600-2609, 2001.

854

Stroke: Patbopbysiology, Diagtrosis, and Management

287. Honda K, Sawada H, Kihara T, et al: Phosphatidylinositol3-hnase
mediates neuroprotection by estrogen in cultured cortical neurons.
J Neurosci Res 60:321327, 2000.
288. Mendez P, Azcoitia I, Garcia-Segura LM: Estrogen receptor alpha
forms estrogen-dependent multimolecular complexes with insulinlike growth factor receptor and phosphatidylinositol3-kinase in the
adult rat brain. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 112:170-176, 2003.
289. Canzoniero LM, Turetsky DM, Choi DW: Measurement of intracellular free zinc concentrations accompanying zinc-induced neuronal death. J Neurosci 19:RC31,1999.
290. Colboume F, Sutherland G, Corbett D: Postischemic hypothermia:
A critical appraisal with implications for clinical treatment. Mol
Neurobiol 14:171-201, 1997.

291. Colboume F, Li H, Buchan AM: Indefatigable CA1 sector neuroprotection with mild hypothermia induced 6 hours after severe
forebrain ischemia in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 19:742-749,
1999.
292. Sonn J, Granot E, Etziony R, et al: Effect of hypothermia on brain
multi-parametric activities in normoxic and partially ischemic
rats. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 132239-246,
2002.
293. Kimura T, Sako K, Tanaka K, et al: Effect of mild hypothermia on
energy state recovery following transient forebrain ischemia in the
gerbil. Exp Brain Res 145333-90, 2002.

